---
agency: Department of Agriculture
applicant_types:
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Formula Grants
authorizations:
- text: Hatch Act of 1887, as amended; Public Law 84-352, 7 U.S.C. 361a-361i; Education
    Amendments of 1972, Section 506, Public Law 92-318; Public Law 93-471; Public
    Law 95-113; Education Amendments of 1980, Section 1361, Public Law 96-374, 7 U.S.C.
    301; Public Law 97-98; Public Law 99-198; Public Law 101-624; Public Law 104-127;
    Public Law 105-185.. Pub. L. 084. 7 U.S.C. &sect; 361a-i.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/uscode/7/361
beneficiary_types:
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- State
- U.S. Territories
categories:
- Agricultural - Research and Development
- Agricultural - Technical Assistance, Information and Services
cfda: '10.203'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=10.203
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "To support agricultural research at State Agricultural Experiment Stations.\
  \ Its purpose is to promote efficient production, marketing, distribution, and utilization\
  \ of products of the farm as essential to the health and welfare of people and to\
  \ promote a sound prosperous agriculture and rural life. Up to 25 percent (25%)\
  \ of funds to be used for integrated cooperative research and extension activities.\
  \ \r\n\r\nTwo (2) Programs are funded under CFDA 10.203. Specific Objectives are\
  \ as follows:\r\n \r\n(A) The Hatch Act of 1887 (Regular Research) \r\nThe Hatch\
  \ Act of 1887 provides the basis for Federal funding for agricultural research activities\
  \ at the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the District of\
  \ Columbia, and the Insular Areas.\r\nState Agricultural Experiment Stations are\
  \ eligible for funds appropriated under this Act according to the following formula:\
  \ The previous year’s base plus the current year increase as follows: \r\nThree\
  \ percent (3%) for Federal Administration, \r\nTwenty percent (20%) equally, \r\n\
  Twenty-six percent (26%) in an amount which bears the same ratio to the total amount\
  \ to be allotted as the rural population of the State bears to the total rural population\
  \ of all the States as determined by the last preceding decennial census; \r\nTwenty-six\
  \ percent (26%) t in an amount which bears the same ratio to the total amount to\
  \ be allotted as the farm population of the State bears to the total farm population\
  \ of all the States as determined by the last preceding decennial census. Twenty-five\
  \ percent (25%)  for the Hatch Multistate Research Fund.\r\n\r\n(B) The Hatch Act\
  \ of 1887 (Multistate Research) \r\nNot less than twenty-five percent (25%) of the\
  \ total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States for cooperative research\
  \ employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State agricultural experiment\
  \ station, working with another State agricultural experiment station, the Agricultural\
  \ Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates to solve problems that\
  \ concern more than one (1) State. These funds are designated as the ‘‘Multistate\
  \ Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.” Funds are allocated on\
  \ a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support national and regional\
  \ projects. These projects and their associated budgets are reviewed and approved\
  \ annually.\r\n\r\nThe 25 percent applies to any amounts appropriated above the\
  \ level of funding in 1955 (the base year). "
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":243418711.0,"usa_spending_actual":243846921.05},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":244357671.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":246010419.3},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":246740596.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":243657085.6}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":237679714.07,"obligation":242123748.26},{"x":"2023","outlay":215346956.35,"obligation":247307927.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":61302346.92,"obligation":246812381.0}]'
permalink: /program/10.203.html
popular_name: "Hatch Act and The Hatch Act of 1887 aka\r\nPAYMENTS TO AGRICULTURAL\
  \ EXPERIMENT STATIONS UNDER THE HATCH ACT:\r\n(A) –The Hatch Act of 1887 (Regular\
  \ Research) \r\n(B) – The Hatch Act of 1887 (Multistate Research Fund) "
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2016:\r\n(A) The Hatch Act of 1887 (Regular Research):\t\
    \r\n\r\nFor the FY 2016 award cycle, the “Payment to States” amount was $172,423,744\
    \ for awards to the 51 1862 state land-grant universities and six land-grants\
    \ in insular areas.\r\n\r\nThere are 5,667 active Hatch Regular research projects\
    \ currently reporting in the REEport systems.  All Hatch projects are described\
    \ as plans of work for a five-year period and roughly 20% of the total number\
    \ of Hatch projects, about 1,000, are new each year.  Projects are reviewed internally\
    \ at the host institution for scientific merit and again by national program staff\
    \ at NIFA for program compliance. Projects report progress through the REEport\
    \ interface and are publically displayed through the CRIS system.  \r\n\r\n(B)\
    \ The Hatch Act of 1887 (Multistate Research Fund):\r\n\r\nThe Hatch Act of 1887\
    \ provides Federal funding for agricultural research activities at the State Agricultural\
    \ Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Insular\
    \ Areas.  \r\n\r\nNot less than 25 percent of the total Hatch Act of 1887 funding\
    \ is allotted to the States for cooperative research employing multidisciplinary\
    \ approaches in which a State agricultural experiment station, working with another\
    \ State agricultural experiment station, the Agricultural Research Service, or\
    \ a college or university, cooperates to solve problems that concern more than\
    \ one State. \r\n\r\nThe 25 percent applies to any amounts appropriated above\
    \ the level of funding in 1955 (the base year). \r\n\r\nThese funds are designated\
    \ as the ‘‘Multistate Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.”\
    \  Funds are allocated on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support\
    \ national and regional projects. These projects and their associated budgets\
    \ are reviewed and approved annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this\
    \ Capacity Grant Program (formerly known as Formula Grant Opportunity).\r\n\r\n\
    \r\nFor FY 2016, $ 56,263,470 was available for  grant awards. \r\n\r\nNIFA received\
    \ a total of 57 applications requesting a total of $56,263,470 in FY 2016.  \r\
    \n\r\nThe funding ratio for this program in FY 2016 was 100%.\r\n\r\nFunded projects\
    \ addressed multistate agricultural research projects.  See Hatch Act research\
    \ scope description in section # 170 – Examples of Funded Projects below.\r\n\
    \ (A) FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2016 – HATCH REGULAR RESEARCH:\r\n\r\nFor the Fiscal Year\
    \ (FY) 2016 award cycle, $172,423,744 was appropriated for awards to the fifty-one\
    \ (51) 1862 state land-grant universities and six (6) land-grants in insular areas.\r\
    \n\r\nThere were 5,667 active Hatch Regular research projects associated with\
    \ the Hatch Act appropriation reporting in the REEport systems. All Hatch projects\
    \ are described as plans of work for a five-year period and roughly 20% of the\
    \ total number of Hatch projects, about 1,000, are new each year.\r\n\r\nProjects\
    \ are reviewed internally at the host institution for scientific merit and again\
    \ by national program staff at NIFA for program compliance. Projects report progress\
    \ through the REEport interface and are publically displayed through the CRIS\
    \ system.\r\n\r\nProjects may span the spectrum of research affecting all aspects\
    \ of agriculture, including:\r\n(1)  soil and water conservation and use;\r\n\
    (2) plant and animal production, protection, and health;\r\n(3) processing, distribution,\
    \ safety, marketing, and utilization of food and agricultural products;\r\n(4)\
    \ forestry, including range management and range products;\r\n(5) multiple use\
    \ of forest rangelands, and urban forestry;\r\n(6) aquaculture;\r\n(7)  home economics\
    \ and family life;\r\n(8) human nutrition;\r\n(9)  rural and community development;\r\
    \n(10) sustainable agriculture;\r\n(11) molecular biology; and\r\n(12) biotechnology.\r\
    \n\r\nResearch may be conducted on problems of local, State, regional, or national\
    \ concern.\r\n\r\n\r\n(B) FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2016 – HATCH MULTI-STATE RESEARCH:\r\
    \n\r\nThe Hatch Act of 1887 provides Federal funding for agricultural research\
    \ activities at the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the\
    \ District of Columbia, and the Insular Areas.\r\n\r\nNot less than 25 percent\
    \ of the total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States for cooperative\
    \ research employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State agricultural\
    \ experiment station, working with another State agricultural experiment station,\
    \ the Agricultural Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates to\
    \ solve problems that concern more than one (1) State. These funds are designated\
    \ as the ‘‘Multistate Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.”\
    \ Funds are allocated on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support\
    \ national and regional projects. These projects and their associated budgets\
    \ are reviewed and approved annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this\
    \ Capacity Grant Program (formerly known as Formula Grant Opportunity).\r\n\r\n\
    For the FY 2016 Capacity Grant (formerly known as Formula Grant Opportunity),\
    \ $59,909,414 was available for project grant awards.\r\n\r\nNIFA received a total\
    \ of 57 applications requesting a total of $59,909,414 in FY 2016.\r\n\r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2017: \n\nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, the amount appropriated\
    \ for this Program was $243,701,000. \n\nThe amount available for awards was $228,105,022,\
    \ after legislatively mandated set-asides.\n\n(A)  HATCH REGULAR RESEARCH:\n\n\
    For the Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 award cycle, $172,423,744 was appropriated for awards\
    \ to the 51 1862 state land-grant universities and six (6) land-grants in insular\
    \ areas.\n\nThere were 4,712 active Hatch Regular research projects associated\
    \ with the Hatch Act appropriation reporting in the REEport systems. All Hatch\
    \ projects are described as plans of work for a five-year period and roughly 20%\
    \ of the total number of Hatch projects, about 1,000, are new each year.  \n\n\
    Projects are reviewed internally at the host institution for scientific merit\
    \ and again by national program staff at NIFA for program compliance. Projects\
    \ report progress through the REEport interface and are publically displayed through\
    \ the CRIS system.  \n\nProjects may span the spectrum of research affecting all\
    \ aspects of agriculture, including:\n(1)  soil and water conservation and use;\
    \ \n(2) plant and animal production, protection, and health; \n(3) processing,\
    \ distribution, safety, marketing, and utilization of food and agricultural products;\
    \ \n(4) forestry, including range management and range products; \n(5) multiple\
    \ use of forest rangelands, and urban forestry; \n(6) aquaculture;\n(7)  home\
    \ economics and family life; \n(8) human nutrition;\n(9)  rural and community\
    \ development; \n(10) sustainable agriculture; \n(11) molecular biology; and\n\
    (12) biotechnology.\n\nResearch may be conducted on problems of local, State,\
    \ regional, or national concern. \n\n\n(B) HATCH MULTI-STATE RESEARCH:\n\nThe\
    \ Hatch Act of 1887 provides Federal funding for agricultural research activities\
    \ at the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the District\
    \ of Columbia, and the Insular Areas.  \n\nNot less than 25 percent (25%) of the\
    \ total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States for cooperative research\
    \ employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State agricultural experiment\
    \ station, working with another State agricultural experiment station, the Agricultural\
    \ Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates to solve problems that\
    \ concern more than one State. These funds are designated as the ‘‘Multistate\
    \ Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.” Funds are allocated\
    \ on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support national and regional\
    \ projects. These projects and their associated budgets are reviewed and approved\
    \ annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this Capacity Grant Program.\n\
    \nFor the FY 2017 Capacity Request for Applications (RFA), $56,120,901 was available\
    \ for project grant awards. \n\nNIFA received a total of 57 applications requesting\
    \ a total of $56,120,901 in FY 2017. \n\nThe funding ratio for this program in\
    \ FY 2017 was 100%."
  year: '2017'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2018: \n\n(A)  HATCH REGULAR RESEARCH:\nFor the Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2018 award cycle, $172,705,011 was the amount available for awards\
    \ to the 51 1862 state land-grant universities and six (6) land-grants in insular\
    \ areas. \n\nThere were 5,874 active Hatch Regular research projects associated\
    \ with the Hatch Act appropriation reporting in the REEport systems. All Hatch\
    \ projects are described as plans of work for a five-year period, and roughly\
    \ 20% of the total number of Hatch projects, about 1,000, are new each year. \
    \ \n\nProjects are reviewed internally at the host institution for scientific\
    \ merit and again by national program staff at NIFA for program compliance. Projects\
    \ report progress through the REEport interface and are publicly displayed through\
    \ the CRIS system.  \n\nProjects may span the spectrum of research affecting all\
    \ aspects of agriculture, including:\n(1)  soil and water conservation and use;\
    \ \n(2) plant and animal production, protection, and health; \n(3) processing,\
    \ distribution, safety, marketing, and utilization of food and agricultural products;\
    \ \n(4) forestry, including range management and range products; \n(5) multiple\
    \ use of forest rangelands, and urban forestry; \n(6) aquaculture;\n(7)  home\
    \ economics and family life; \n(8) human nutrition;\n(9)  rural and community\
    \ development; \n(10) sustainable agriculture; \n(11) molecular biology; and\n\
    (12) biotechnology.\n\nResearch may be conducted on problems of local, State,\
    \ regional, or national concern. \n\n(B) HATCH MULTI-STATE RESEARCH:\n\nThe Hatch\
    \ Act of 1887 provides Federal funding for agricultural research activities at\
    \ the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the District of\
    \ Columbia, and the Insular Areas.  \n\nNot less than 25 percent (25%) of the\
    \ total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States for cooperative research\
    \ employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State agricultural experiment\
    \ station, working with another State agricultural experiment station, the Agricultural\
    \ Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates to solve problems that\
    \ concern more than one State. These funds are designated as the ‘‘Multistate\
    \ Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.” Funds are allocated\
    \ on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support national and regional\
    \ projects. These projects and their associated budgets are reviewed and approved\
    \ annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this Capacity Grant Program.\n\
    \nFor the FY 2018 Request for Applications (RFA), $56,348,551 was available for\
    \ project grant awards. \n\nThe funding ratio for this program in FY 2018 was\
    \ 100%."
  year: '2018'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2019: \n\n(A)  HATCH REGULAR RESEARCH:\n\nFor the\
    \ Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 award cycle, $183,367,803 was available for awards to\
    \ the 51 1862 state land-grant universities and six land-grants in insular areas.\
    \ \n\nThere are 4,513 active Hatch Regular research projects currently reporting\
    \ in the REEport systems.  All Hatch projects are described as plans of work for\
    \ a five-year period and roughly 20% of the total number of Hatch projects, about\
    \ 1,000, are new each year.  \n\nProjects are reviewed internally at the host\
    \ institution for scientific merit and again by national program staff at NIFA\
    \ for program compliance. Projects report progress through the REEport interface\
    \ and are publicly displayed through the CRIS system.  \n\n(B) HATCH MULTI-STATE\
    \ RESEARCH:\n\nThe Hatch Act of 1887 provides Federal funding for agricultural\
    \ research activities at the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50\
    \ States, the District of Columbia, and the Insular Areas.  \n\nNot less than\
    \ 25 percent (25%) of the total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States\
    \ for cooperative research employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State\
    \ agricultural experiment station, working with another State agricultural experiment\
    \ station, the Agricultural Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates\
    \ to solve problems that concern more than one State. These funds are designated\
    \ as the ‘‘Multistate Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.”\
    \ Funds are allocated on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support\
    \ national and regional projects. These projects and their associated budgets\
    \ are reviewed and approved annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this\
    \ Capacity Grant Program.\n\nFor the FY 2019 Request for Applications (RFA), $60,050,909\
    \ was available for project grant awards. \n\nNIFA received a total of 57 applications\
    \ requesting a total of $60,050,909 in FY 2019.  \n\nThe funding ratio for this\
    \ program in FY 2019 was 100%."
  year: '2019'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2020: \n\n(A)  HATCH REGULAR RESEARCH:\n\nBased upon\
    \ the President’s Budget, for the FY 2020 award cycle, the projected amount available\
    \ for awards will be $172,382,319.  \n\nNIFA projects making awards for the 51\
    \ 1862 state land-grant universities and six land-grants in insular areas. \n\n\
    We project that there will be approximately 5,000 active projects, of which about\
    \ 1,000 will be new in FY 2020.\n\n(B) HATCH MULTI-STATE RESEARCH:\n\nThe Hatch\
    \ Act of 1887 provides Federal funding for agricultural research activities at\
    \ the State Agricultural Experiment Stations in the 50 States, the District of\
    \ Columbia, and the Insular Areas.  \n\nNot less than 25 percent (25%) of the\
    \ total Hatch Act of 1887 funding is allotted to the States for cooperative research\
    \ employing multidisciplinary approaches in which a State agricultural experiment\
    \ station, working with another State agricultural experiment station, the Agricultural\
    \ Research Service, or a college or university, cooperates to solve problems that\
    \ concern more than one State. These funds are designated as the ‘‘Multistate\
    \ Research Fund, State Agricultural Experiment Stations.” Funds are allocated\
    \ on a prorata basis and allocations are adjusted to support national and regional\
    \ projects. These projects and their associated budgets are reviewed and approved\
    \ annually. A matching fund requirement exists for this Capacity Grant Program.\n\
    \nFor the FY 2020 Capacity Request for Applications (RFAs), NIFA projects that\
    \ a similar level of funding and similar number of proposals as in FY 2019.\n\n\
    Funded projects should address multistate agricultural research projects."
  year: '2020'
- description: Pertinent information will be provided by Program at a future date.
  year: '2024'
rules_regulations: "As an administrator of U.S. government support, NIFA works in\
  \ partnership with grantees to ensure responsible stewardship of federal funds.\
  \ Our grantees and partners are required to comply with all relevant rules and regulations.\
  \ The following resources are provided to NIFA’s partners and award recipients to\
  \ support their adherence to federal regulations governing program performance:\r\
  \n\r\nNIFA’s primary (main) website:\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/regulations-and-guidelines\r\
  \n\r\nThe following represent specific documents and direct links:\r\n\r\nPOLICY\
  \ GUIDE\r\nNIFA’s Federal Assistance Policy Guide describes agency policies and\
  \ procedures.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/policy-guide\r\n\r\nCERTIFICATIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS\r\
  \nCertifications and representations provided through the NIFA application process.\r\
  \nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/certifications-and-representations\r\n\r\n\r\nACKNOWLEDGEMENT\
  \ OF USDA SUPPORT BY NIFA\r\nWhen acknowledging USDA support in accordance with\
  \ 2 CFR Part 415, grantees must use the following acknowledgement for all projects\
  \ or initiatives supported by NIFA.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/acknowledgment-usda-support-nifa\r\
  \n\r\nFEDERAL REGULATIONS\r\nThe Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) lists all regulations\
  \ published in the Federal Register.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/federal-regulations\r\
  \n\r\nFOIA\r\nThe Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) provides that any person has\
  \ the right to request access to federal documents and information such as research\
  \ data.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/foia\r\n\r\nNEPA POLICY AND GUIDANCE\r\nThe National\
  \ Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Policy and Guidance set the standard for identifying\
  \ potential environmental impacts.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/nepa-policy-and-guidance\r\
  \n\r\nOGFM ISSUED CORRESPONDENCE\r\nThe Office of Grants and Financial Management\
  \ occasionally issues correspondence to applicants, grantees, and/or the general\
  \ public for informational or clarification purposes.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/ogfm-issued-correspondence\r\
  \n\r\nRESEARCH MISCONDUCT\r\nNIFA requires that all its awardees adhere to the USDA\
  \ Scientific Integrity Policy and the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct.\r\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/research-misconduct \r\n\r\nNIFA’S GENERAL AWARD TERMS AND\
  \ CONDITIONS\r\n\r\nAward terms and conditions are determined by statutory, regulatory,\
  \ and agency requirements, as well as each grant’s circumstances. Terms and conditions\
  \ dictate important items related to your grant, including method of payment, reporting\
  \ frequency and content, and prior approval requirements.\r\n\r\nReferences to the\
  \ terms and conditions of awards are located on the NIFA 2009 Award Fact Sheet.\
  \ NIFA's general award terms and conditions (see link below) is applicable to this\
  \ program, for awards with an award date on December 26, 2014 and thereafter.\r\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/resource/nifa-general-terms-and-conditions-grants-and-cooperative-agreements-october-2016.\r\
  \n\r\n"
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/1818478ad15e411c85c88e96cbefb911/view
sub-agency: National Institute of Food and Agriculture
title: Payments to Agricultural Experiment Stations Under the Hatch Act
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=7c06ce02bb41bde8e69f3c91dde2973f
---
