---
agency: Department of Agriculture
applicant_types:
- Federal
- Other private institutions/organizations
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Quasi-public nonprofit institution/organization
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: Section 2 (c), Public Law 89-106, 7 U.S.C. 450i(c), as amended.
  url: null
beneficiary_types:
- Federal
- Other private institution/organization
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- Quasi-public nonprofit organization
- State
categories:
- Agricultural - Research and Development
- Community Development - Rural Community Development
cfda: '10.200'
fiscal_year: '2023'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=10.200
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "To carry out research, to facilitate or expand promising breakthroughs\
  \ in areas of the food and agricultural sciences of importance to the nation and\
  \ to facilitate or expand on-going State-Federal food and agricultural research\
  \ programs.\n\nPrograms Listed under 10.200 are:  \nMinor Crop Pest Management Program\
  \ Interregional Research Project #4 (IR-4)\nGlobal Change Ultraviolet Radiation\
  \ Monitoring and Research Program (GC/UV-B)\nFood and Agricultural Education Information\
  \ System\nSpecial Research Grants Program Potato Breeding Research\nSpecial Research\
  \ Grants Program Aquaculture Research\nAgricultural Science Center of Excellence\
  \ for Nutrition and Diet (ASCEND) Pilot Nutrition Hub\nRegional Aquaculture Center\
  \ Program, Section 1475\nSupplemental and Alternative Crops Competitive Grants Program\
  \ (SACC)"
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":13607309.0,"usa_spending_actual":32430745.71},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":32886901.0,"usa_spending_actual":32220571.06},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":0.0}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":5795123.77,"obligation":18492891.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":34960.48,"obligation":9599014.25},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/10.200.html
popular_name: Special Research Grants (SRGP)
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2016:\r\n\r\n(A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems:\r\
    \n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years\r\
    \n\r\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet Radiation Monitoring and Research Program\
    \ (GC/UV-B):\r\n\r\nThe program made one (1) non-competitive award to Colorado\
    \ State University to operate and manage USDA’s ultraviolet radiation climatology\
    \ network, and to conduct, in collaboration with another institution, research\
    \ on ultraviolet radiation effects on agriculturally relevant crops and integration\
    \ of crop models.  Coupling with economic models, effects research and simulations\
    \ enable us to project regional and national climate change impacts on agriculture.\
    \  The program maintained high data collection rates, model runs were made for\
    \ corn, and work with crop simulations continues.  Economic analysis modules have\
    \ been coupled with the integrated assessment framework.\r\n\r\n(C ) Integrated\
    \ Pest Management & Biological Control:\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N): Program\
    \ has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n(D) Minor Crop Pest Management\
    \ Program Interregional Research Project #4:\r\n\r\nFor the FY 2016 award cycle,\
    \ $11,093,385 was awarded.  Applications were received from four (4) regional\
    \ centers and the National Headquarters Office.  A diverse panel reviewed the\
    \ applications and recommended funding each of the proposals received.  A total\
    \ of five (5) awards were made.  Funds support research on pesticides for use\
    \ in specialty crops and minor crops.\r\n\r\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives\
    \ (PMAP):\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N): Program has not been funded for several\
    \ years.\r\n\r\n(F) Special Research Grants Program Potato Breeding Research:\r\
    \n\r\nFor the FY 2016 funding cycle, approximately $1,849,191 was available to\
    \ fund proposals submitted to this program.\r\n\r\nA total of five (5) applications,\
    \ requesting a total of $2,229,378 have been received by the program.\r\n\r\n\
    On June 6, 2016, a seven-member peer review panel has evaluated these applications.\
    \ The peer panel included faculty from 1862 and 1890 land grant universities,\
    \ and Federal and industry scientists.\r\n\r\nFunded projects will support potato\
    \ research that has a high potential to develop potato varieties with a high value\
    \ to the potato industry.\r\n\r\n(G) Critical Agricultural Materials:\r\n\r\n\
    No Action Needed (N/A/N): Program has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\
    \n(H) Special Research Grants Program Aquaculture Research (aka Aquaculture Centers):\r\
    \n\r\nThe FY 2016 Aquaculture Research Special Research Grants program proposals\
    \ have been received. A total of 56 proposals were received. It is anticipated\
    \ that 4 awards will be made from approximately $1.2 million available to the\
    \ awardees. The panel selecting the awards met July 12-14.\r\n\r\nPertinent data\
    \ to be provided by Program at a future date.\r\n\r\n(I) Supplemental and Alternative\
    \ Crops Competitive Grants Program\r\n(aka Canola Research and SACC):\r\n\r\n\
    For the FY 2016 award cycle, approximately $768,924 is available to fund proposals\
    \ received by this program.  Maximum award size is $210,000.\r\n\r\nA total of\
    \ ten (10) applications requesting a total of $ 2,010,087 was received in this\
    \ year’s competition.  On June 6, 2016, a seven-member peer review panel evaluated\
    \ these applications.\r\n\r\nThe peer panel included faculty from 1862 and 1890\
    \ land grant universities, and Federal and industry scientists.\r\n\r\nFunded\
    \ projects will support integrated research and extension projects that focus\
    \ on developing and testing superior canola germplasm; improving methods of planting,\
    \ cultivation and harvesting; and transferring the new knowledge to producers.\r\
    \n\r\n(J) Policy Research Centers (aka Agriculture and Rural Policy Research):\r\
    \n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N): Program has not been funded for several years.\r\
    \n\r\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research aka Rangeland Research\
    \ Program (aka Joe Skeen Institute for Rangeland Restoration):\r\n\r\nNo Action\
    \ Needed (N/A/N):\r\nListing represents an error. See CFDA # 10.202 for this Program.\r\
    \n\r\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants Program:\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\
    \nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n(M) Minor Use Animal Drugs:\r\
    \n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\
    \n\r\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment Program:\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed\
    \ (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\nNOTE:\r\n\
    No Action Needed (N/A/N) for CFDA # 10.200 (O), (P), and (Q). They were assigned\
    \ for informational purposes only and do not represent federal assistance programs.\r\
    \n\r\n(R) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Expanded Food and Nutrition\
    \ Education Program (SNAP & EFNEP): Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention\
    \ Centers of Excellence (RNECE):\r\n\r\nNo new awards are planned for the RNECE\
    \ Initiative.\r\n\r\n The following represents accomplishments for active Programs:\r\
    \n\r\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet Radiation Monitoring and Research Program\
    \ (GC/UV-B):\r\n\r\nThe program made one (1) competitive award to operate and\
    \ manage USDA’s ultraviolet radiation climatology network, and to conduct, in\
    \ collaboration with another institution, research on ultraviolet radiation effects\
    \ on agriculturally relevant crops and integration of crop models. Coupling with\
    \ economic models, effects research and simulations enable us to project regional\
    \ and national climate change impacts on agriculture.  The program maintained\
    \ high data collection rates, model runs were made for corn, and work with crop\
    \ simulations continues.  Economic analysis modules have been coupled with the\
    \ integrated assessment framework.\r\n\r\nThe amount available to fund proposals\
    \ was $1,305,147.\r\n\r\n(D) Minor Crop Pest Management Program Interregional\
    \ Research Project #4:\r\n\r\nApplications were received from four (4) regional\
    \ centers and the National Headquarters Office.  A diverse panel reviewed the\
    \ applications and recommended funding each of the proposals received.  A total\
    \ of five (5) awards were made.  Funds support research on pesticides for use\
    \ in specialty crops and minor crops.\r\n\r\n(F) Special Research Grants Program\
    \ Potato Breeding Research:\r\n\r\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 grant cycle,\
    \ $1,848,966 was available to fund proposals submitted to this program.\r\n\r\n\
    In 2016, four (4) proposals were submitted and they were reviewed in the same\
    \ panel with canola proposals.  There were ten (10) panelists. \r\n\r\nFunds were\
    \ available to support all four (4) awards. \r\n\r\nThe funding ratio for this\
    \ program is 100%.\r\n\r\nFunded projects will support potato (Solanum tuberosum\
    \ L.) research that focuses on the development and testing of superior potato\
    \ varieties for commercial production.\r\n\r\n(H) Special Research Grants Program\
    \ Aquaculture Research (aka Aquaculture Centers):\r\n\r\nThe Fiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2016 Aquaculture Research Special Research Grants program panel met from July\
    \ 12-14. A total of 56 proposals were received. Four (4) awards were made. The\
    \ total amount of $1,236,969 available to fund these four (4) proposals. \r\n\r\
    \n(I) Supplemental and Alternative Crops Competitive Grants Program (aka Canola\
    \ Research and SACC):\r\n\r\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 award cycle, $767,790\
    \ was available to fund the proposals received by this program.  The maximum award\
    \ was $195,000.\r\n\r\nTen (10) applications were received, a total of $ 2,010,087\
    \ was requested for the FY 2016 competition.  On June 6, 2016, a seven (7) member\
    \ peer review panel evaluated the applications. \r\n\r\nThe peer panel included\
    \ faculty from 1862 and 1890 land-grant institutions (LGIs), and Federal and industry\
    \ scientists.\r\n\r\nFunds were available to support a total of four (4) awards.\
    \  The funding rate was 40%.\r\n\r\nFunded projects will develop canola as a viable\
    \ supplemental and alternative crop in the United States. They are supporting\
    \ integrated research and extension projects that focus on developing and testing\
    \ superior canola germplasm; improving methods of planting, cultivation and harvesting;\
    \ and transferring the new knowledge to producers. \r\n\r\nThese projects involved\
    \ stakeholders in priority setting, project development and implementation; and\
    \ included multi-state cooperation.  The funded projects will complement research\
    \ being conducted by the U. S. Department of Agriculture‘s Agricultural Research\
    \ Service (ARS).\r\n\r\nThe following Programs are no longer funded: hence, no\
    \ action is required:\r\n\r\n(A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems\r\n\r\n(C\
    \ ) Integrated Pest Management & Biological Control (Special Research Grants):\r\
    \n\r\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives (PMAP):\r\n\r\n(G) Critical Agricultural\
    \ Materials:\r\n\r\n(J) Policy Research Centers (aka Agriculture and Rural Policy\
    \ Research):\r\n\r\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research aka Rangeland\
    \ Research Program \r\n\r\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants Program:\r\n\r\n\
    (M) Minor Use Animal Drugs:\r\n\r\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment Program:\r\
    \n\r\n(R) Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program and Expanded Food and Nutrition\
    \ Education Program (SNAP & EFNEP): Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention\
    \ Centers of Excellence (RNECE):\r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 – ACTIVE Programs:\nTotal Appropriations for\
    \ the Special Research Grants Program was approximately $21.7 million for Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2017. \n\nPer the Budget Office, after legislatively authorized set-asides,\
    \ approximately $20.1 million was available for awards.\n\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet\
    \ Radiation Monitoring and Research Program (GC/UV-B):\n\nThe program made one\
    \ (1) continuation award.\n\nThe Principal Investigators (PIs) operated and managed\
    \ USDA’s ultraviolet radiation climatology network, and conducted, in collaboration\
    \ with other institutions, research on ultraviolet radiation effects on agriculturally\
    \ relevant crops.  Projection of regional and national climate change impacts\
    \ on cotton/maize/soybeans using economic models, effects research, and simulations\
    \ continued. \n\nThe amount available to fund proposals was $1,305,638.\n\n(D)\
    \ Minor Crop Pest Management Program Interregional Research Project #4 (aka IR-4):\n\
    \nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 award cycle, $11,070,513 was awarded. \n \nIn\
    \ FY 2017 NIFA posted a competitive RFA for four (4) regional centers and a National\
    \ Headquarters Office to administer the Minor Crop and Minor Use Pesticide program\
    \ known as IR-4 for the next two years.  A peer review panel reviewed all applications\
    \ that were received and recommended funding each of the 5 (five) proposals received.\
    \   Funds support research on pesticides for use in specialty crops and minor\
    \ crops\n\n(F) Potato Breeding Research:\n\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 award\
    \ cycle, $2,078,195 was available for grant awards.\n\nA total of four (4) applications\
    \ were received that requested a total of $4,301,857. \n\nFive (5) proposals were\
    \ submitted to the program.  One (1) was rejected for lack of program fit, so\
    \ four (4) were reviewed by a panel of five (5) reviewers.\n\nA six member peer-review\
    \ panel evaluated these applications on June 12, 2017.  The peer panels included\
    \ faculty from land grant universities and Federal and industry scientists.\n\n\
    Funds were available to support four new integrated research and extension projects\
    \ awards totaling $2,078,195.\n\nThe funding success rate for this program in\
    \ FY 2017 was 80% for new awards.\n\nFunded projects will support potato research\
    \ that has a high potential to develop potato varieties with a high value to the\
    \ potato industry.\n\n(H) Aquaculture Research and Aquaculture Centers:\n\nThe\
    \ Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 Aquaculture Research Special Research Grants program panel\
    \ met from July 17-19. A total of 54 proposals were received. Four (4) proposals\
    \ will be funded. There was approximately $1,216,344 million available for these\
    \ awards.\n\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, approximately $3.7 million was available\
    \ for the Regional Aquaculture Centers Program. \nEach of the Regional Centers\
    \ was awarded $734,424.\n\n\n(I) Supplemental and Alternative Crops Competitive\
    \ Grants Program (aka Canola Research and SACC):\n\nFor the FY 2017 award cycle,\
    \ $766,656 was available to fund the proposals received by this program.  The\
    \ maximum award was $325,000. \n\nSeven (7) applications were received, a total\
    \ of $ 1,397,133 was requested for the FY 2017 competition.  On June 22, 2017,\
    \ an eight (8) member peer review panel evaluated the applications. \n\nThe peer\
    \ panel included faculty from 1862 land-grant institutions (LGIs), and Federal\
    \ and industry scientists.\n\nThree (3) awards were supported with the funding.\
    \  The funding rate was 43%.\n\nFunded projects will develop canola as a viable\
    \ supplemental and alternative crop in the United States. They are supporting\
    \ integrated research and extension projects that focus on developing and testing\
    \ superior canola germplasm; improving methods of planting, cultivation and harvesting;\
    \ and transferring the new knowledge to producers. \n\nThese projects involved\
    \ stakeholders in priority setting, project development and implementation; and\
    \ included multi-state cooperation.  The funded projects will complement research\
    \ being conducted by the U. S. Department of Agriculture‘s Agricultural Research\
    \ Service (ARS).\n\n(S) Food and Agriculture Education Information System (FAEIS)\n\
    \nIn FY 2017 FAEIS funded a single continuation grant in the amount of $220,000.\n\
    SPECIAL NOTE: \nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently\
    \ funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:\
    \  \n\n(A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems;\n\n(C ) Integrated Pest Management\
    \ & Biological Control;\n\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives (PMAP);\n\n(G) Critical\
    \ Agricultural Materials;\n\n(J) Policy Research Centers \n(aka Agriculture and\
    \ Rural Policy Research);\n\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research.\n\
    NOTE: Previously, was erroneously listed under CFDA # 10.200 (K). The appropriate\
    \ CFDA Number is # 10.202.\n\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants Program;\n\n\
    (M) Minor Use Animal Drugs;\n\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment Program;\
    \ and \n\n(R) Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Centers of Excellence\
    \ (RNECE)."
  year: '2017'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 – ACTIVE Programs:\n\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet\
    \ Radiation Monitoring and Research Program (GC/UV-B):\n\nThe program made one\
    \ (1) continuation award for a grant entitled Agroclimatology - Global Change,\
    \ Ultraviolet Radiation Monitoring and Research. The PIs operated and managed\
    \ USDA’s ultraviolet radiation climatology network, and conducted, in collaboration\
    \ with other institutions, research on ultraviolet radiation effects on agriculturally\
    \ relevant crops.  \n\nProjection of regional and national climate variability\
    \ impacts on cotton/maize/soybeans using economic models, effects research, and\
    \ simulations continued. \n\nThe amount available to fund proposals was $1,305,638.\n\
    \n(D) Minor Crop Pest Management Program Interregional Research Project #4 (aka\
    \ IR-4):\n\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 award cycle, $11,070,513 was awarded\
    \ as continuation awards to the current four (4) regional centers and the National\
    \ Headquarters Office. Funds support research on pesticides for use in specialty\
    \ crops and minor crops.  \n\n\n(F) Potato Breeding Research:\n\nFor the Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2018 award cycle, $2,323,200 was available for grant awards.  A total\
    \ of four (4) continuation applications were received, requesting a total of $2,323,200.\
    \ The funding success rate for this program in FY 2018 was 100% for continuation\
    \ awards.\n\nThese were continuations of 2-yr awards granted the year before by\
    \ a peer review panel.  Project success was reviewed internally by NIFA staff\
    \ to ensure projects were progressing.  \n\n(H) Aquaculture Research (aka Aquaculture\
    \ Centers):\n\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2018:\n\nThe Aquaculture Research Special Research\
    \ Grants Program was not included in the President’s Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 budget\
    \ request. \n\nHowever, funding was appropriated for the Program in FY 2018. The\
    \ appropriated amount was $1.35 million. These funds were made available for this\
    \ program with 56 proposals submitted for funding. Four (4) awards of approximately\
    \ $300,000 each were made.\n\n\n(I) Supplemental and Alternative Crops Competitive\
    \ Grants Program (aka Canola Research and SACC):\n\n For the FY 2018 award cycle,\
    \ approximately $762,600 was anticipated for awards.  Maximum award size was $200,000.\n\
    \nEight (8) applications were received, for a total of $ 1,589,476 requested for\
    \ the FY 2018 competition.  On June 18, 2018, an eight (8) member peer review\
    \ panel evaluated the applications.  The peer panel included faculty from 1862\
    \ and 1890 land-grant institutions (LGIs), Federal scientists, and an industry\
    \ farmer.\n\nFour (4) awards were supported, for a total available of $763,071.\
    \  The funding rate was 50%. \n\nFunded projects supported integrated research\
    \ and extension (R&E) projects focused on developing and testing superior canola\
    \ germplasm; improving methods of planting, cultivation and harvesting; and transferring\
    \ new knowledge to producers. \n\n\n\n\n(S) Food and Agriculture Education Information\
    \ System (FAEIS)\n\nSPECIAL NOTE:\nThis program is not supported through a program\
    \ specific appropriation\n\nIn FY 2018 Food and Agriculture Education Information\
    \ System (FAEIS) was competed for a single award of $220,000.\n\nThe program received\
    \ two applications and one was awarded.\n\nIt is anticipated that continuation\
    \ grants will be awarded, contingent upon performance, for project periods up\
    \ to five years. \n\nThe anticipated total for the entire project period is approximately\
    \ $1,100,000.\n\n(T) Air Force Medical Operations Agency (AFMOA) Mental Health\
    \ Division Research Project (aka MFRP)\n\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 the amount\
    \ available to support this Program was $1,443,990.\n\n(U) Air Force Family Advocacy\
    \ Program\n\nThe actual funding for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 was $2,129,595.\n\n\
    SPECIAL NOTE: \nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently\
    \ funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:\
    \  \n\n(A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems;\n\n(C ) Integrated Pest Management\
    \ & Biological Control;\n\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives (PMAP);\n\n(G) Critical\
    \ Agricultural Materials;\n\n(J) Policy Research Centers \n(aka Agriculture and\
    \ Rural Policy Research);\n\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research.\
    \ \nSee CFDA # 10.202 for this Program.\n\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants\
    \ Program;\n\n(M) Minor Use Animal Drugs;\n\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment\
    \ Program; and \n\n(R) Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Centers\
    \ of Excellence (RNECE)."
  year: '2018'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 – ACTIVE Programs:\n\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet\
    \ Radiation Monitoring and Research Program (GC/UV-B):\n\nThe program made one\
    \ (1) continuation award for a grant entitled Agroclimatology - Global Change,\
    \ Ultraviolet Radiation Monitoring and Research.  The PIs continued to operate\
    \ and manage USDA’s ultraviolet radiation climatology network, and conducted,\
    \ in collaboration with other institutions, research on ultraviolet radiation\
    \ effects on agriculturally relevant crops.  Further emphasis was placed on crop\
    \ modeling and economics portions of the project. \n\nThe amount available to\
    \ fund proposals was $1,305,638.  \n\nThis project received an approved Competition\
    \ Waiver allowing it to continue over the next three (3) years.  A copy of this\
    \ waiver has been uploaded to the appropriate database. Remaining documents for\
    \ establishment of the project are in process.    \n\n(D) Minor Crop Pest Management\
    \ Program Interregional Research Project #4 (aka IR-4):\n\nFor the Fiscal Year\
    \ 2019 award cycle, $11,069,838 will be awarded.  \n\nIn FY 2019 NIFA posted a\
    \ competitive RFA for four (4) regional centers and a National Headquarters Office\
    \ to administer the Minor Crop and Minor Use Pesticide program known as IR-4 for\
    \ the next two years.  A peer review panel reviewed all applications that were\
    \ received and recommended funding each of the 5 (five) proposals received.  \
    \ \n\n(F) Potato Breeding Research:\n\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 award cycle,\
    \ $2.25 million was anticipated to be available for grant awards.  A total of\
    \ four (4) applications were received, requesting a combined total of $4,644,804.\
    \ \n\nA five (5)-member peer-review panel evaluated these applications on July\
    \ 18, 2019.  The peer panel included faculty from one (1) 1890 and three (3) 1862\
    \ land grant universities; and one (1) Federal (ARS) scientist.\n\nFunds were\
    \ available to support four new integrated research and extension projects awards,\
    \ totaling $2,555,070.  The funding success rate for this program in FY 2019 was\
    \ 100% for new awards.\n\nFunded projects will support breeding research that\
    \ leads to the development and commercial use of superior performing potato varieties\
    \ that address significant challenges to the U.S. potato industry.\n\n(H) Aquaculture\
    \ Research (aka Aquaculture Centers):\n\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2019:\n\nThe Aquaculture\
    \ Research Special Research Grants Program was not included in the President’s\
    \ Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 budget request. \n\nHowever, funding was appropriated\
    \ for the Program in FY 2019. The appropriated amount was $2.0 million. These\
    \ funds were made, available for this program with 72 proposals submitted for\
    \ funding. Eight awards were made from approximately $100,000 to $300,000 each.\
    \ \n\n(I) Supplemental and Alternative Crops Competitive Grants Program (aka Canola\
    \ Research and SACC):\n\nFor the FY 2019 cycle, approximately $1,000,000 was anticipated\
    \ for awards.  Maximum award size was anticipated at $225,000 for Canola Regional\
    \ Integrated R&E Projects (one/region), and $100,000 for canola projects in other\
    \ states.  Funding was also available for a conference to assess national industrial\
    \ hemp R&E needs, not to exceed $50,000.\n\nEight (8) applications were received:\
    \ six (6) for canola R&E projects and two (2) for hemp R&E needs-assessment conferences,\
    \ for a total of $1,199,879 requested for FY 2019.  On July 11, 2019, a six (6)-member\
    \ peer review panel evaluated the applications.  The panel included faculty from\
    \ 1862 land-grant universities and a farmer-member of the U.S. Canola Board.\n\
    \nTotal available funding was $928,830, from which three regional canola R&E projects\
    \ were funded for $293,000 each, and one hemp conference for $50,000, for a funding\
    \ rate of 50%. The R&E projects will develop and test superior canola germplasm;\
    \ improve planting, cultivation and harvesting methods; and transfer new knowledge\
    \ to producers.  The conference will assess national industrial hemp R&E needs.\n\
    \n(S) Food and Agriculture Education Information System (FAEIS)\nAs single continuation\
    \ award of $220,000 is expected to be awarded in July, 2020.\n\n(T) Air Force\
    \ Medical Operations Agency (AFMOA) Mental Health Division Research Project (aka\
    \ MFRP)\n\nProgram did not received funding in FY 2019.\n\n(U) Air Force Family\
    \ Advocacy Program\n\nThis program was not awarded funding in FY 2019. \n\nSPECIAL\
    \ NOTE: \nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently funded.\
    \ Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\
    \n(A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems;\n\n(C ) Integrated Pest Management\
    \ & Biological Control;\n\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives (PMAP);\n\n(G) Critical\
    \ Agricultural Materials;\n\n(J) Policy Research Centers \n(aka Agriculture and\
    \ Rural Policy Research);\n\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research.\
    \ \nSee CFDA # 10.202 for this Program.\n\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants\
    \ Program;\n\n(M) Minor Use Animal Drugs;\n\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment\
    \ Program; and \n\n(R) Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Centers\
    \ of Excellence (RNECE)."
  year: '2019'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 – ACTIVE Programs:\n\n(B) Global Change Ultraviolet\
    \ Radiation Monitoring and Research Program (GC/UV-B):\n\nThe FY 2020 funding\
    \ levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.  \n\n\
    If this Program is funded in FY 2020, it is projected that the funding level will\
    \ be comparable to that previously allocated. Under the approved Competition Waiver\
    \ approved in 2019, the project entitled Agroclimatology - Global Change, Ultraviolet\
    \ Radiation Monitoring and Research is eligible for funding.\n\nPertinent details\
    \ will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(D) Minor Crop Pest Management\
    \ Program Interregional Research Project #4 (aka IR-4):\nThe FY 2020 funding levels\
    \ have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program\
    \ is funded in FY 2020, it is projected that the funding level will be comparable\
    \ and the types of projects will be similar. NIFA anticipates funding five (5)\
    \ continuation projects, i.e. four (4) regional centers and a National Headquarters\
    \ Office.\n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\
    \n(F) Potato Breeding Research:\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been\
    \ established by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program is funded in\
    \ FY 2020, it is anticipated that NIFA will offer only continuation awards.  NIFA\
    \ does not intend to solicit new applications for 2020. \n\nPertinent details\
    \ will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(H) Aquaculture Research (aka\
    \ Aquaculture Centers):\n\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2020:\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels\
    \ have yet to be established by Congressional Appropriations.  \n\nHowever, if\
    \ the Program is funded in FY 2020, it is anticipated that an amount similar to\
    \ the FY 2019 levels ($2.0 million, appropriated) will be made available for this\
    \ program with approximately 70 proposals submitted for funding. If funded, it\
    \ is anticipated that approximately $1.7 million will be available for eight (8)\
    \ awards of approximately $100,000 to $300,000 each. \n\nIt is projected that\
    \ similar projects will be supported in FY 2020.\n\nPertinent details will be\
    \ provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(I) Supplemental and Alternative Crops\
    \ Competitive Grants Program (aka Canola Research and SACC):\n\n\n(S) Food and\
    \ Agriculture Education Information System (FAEIS)\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels\
    \ is contingent upon Congressional Appropriations to Higher Education programs.\
    \  \n\nFAEIS will be funded through a non-competitive continuation award.\n\n\
    (T) Air Force Medical Operations Agency (AFMOA) Mental Health Division Research\
    \ Project (aka MFRP)\n\nProgram will not receive funding in FY 2020.\n\n(U) Air\
    \ Force Family Advocacy Program\n\nThis program is not projected to be funded\
    \ in FY 2020.\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: \nThe listing below represents Programs which have\
    \ not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the\
    \ following Programs:  \n (A) Expert IPM Decision Support Systems;\n\n(C ) Integrated\
    \ Pest Management & Biological Control;\n\n(E) Pest Management Alternatives (PMAP);\n\
    \n(G) Critical Agricultural Materials;\n\n(J) Policy Research Centers \n(aka Agriculture\
    \ and Rural Policy Research);\n\n(K) McIntire-Stennis Cooperative Forestry Research.\
    \ \nSee CFDA # 10.202 for this Program.\n\n(L) Forest Products Research Grants\
    \ Program;\n\n(M) Minor Use Animal Drugs;\n\n(N) National Biological Impact Assessment\
    \ Program; and \n\n(R) Regional Nutrition Education and Obesity Prevention Centers\
    \ of Excellence (RNECE)."
  year: '2020'
- description: 'Proposals received: 5

    Proposals funded: 5

    Goals from portal: The mission of the SRAC is to support aquaculture research,
    development, and demonstration to enhance viable and profitable U.S. aquaculture
    production to benefit consumers, producers, service industries, and the American
    economy.'
  year: '2023'
- description: 'Proposals received: 5

    Proposals funded: 5

    The primary objective of this project is to fund aquaculture research, development,
    demonstration, extension, and education projects supported by the Center for Tropical
    and Subtropical Aquaculture (CTSA) to fulfill its mission to enhance viable and
    profitable U.S. aquaculture. CTSA is one of five Regional Aquaculture Centers
    (RACs) funded by the U.S. Department of Agriculture National Institute of Food
    and Agriculture.'
  year: '2024'
rules_regulations: "NIFA works in partnership with grantees to ensure responsible\
  \ stewardship of federal funds. Grantees and partners are required to comply with\
  \ all relevant rules and regulations. The following resources are provided to NIFA’s\
  \ partners and award recipients to support their adherence to federal regulations\
  \ governing program performance: \n1.)\tNIFA Federal Regulations page: https://nifa.usda.gov/federal-regulations\
  \  \n2.)\tNIFA Regulations and Guidelines webpage: https://nifa.usda.gov/regulations-and-guidelines\
  \ \n3.)\tNIFA Policy Guide: https://nifa.usda.gov/policy-guide \n4.)\tNIFA Award\
  \ Terms and Conditions page: https://www.nifa.usda.gov/grants/regulations-and-guidelines/terms-conditions\n\
  5.)\tNIFA Grant Application Guide: https://www.nifa.usda.gov/nifa-22-001-nifa-grants-application-guide\
  \ \n6.)\tNIFA Certifications and Representations page: https://nifa.usda.gov/certifications-and-representations\
  \ \n7.)\tNIFA Acknowledgment of USDA Support page: https://nifa.usda.gov/acknowledgment-usda-support-nifa\
  \ \n8.)\tNIFA Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Page: https://nifa.usda.gov/foia\
  \ \n9.)\tNational Environmental Policy Act Policy and Guidance page https://nifa.usda.gov/nepa-policy-and-guidance\
  \ \n10.)\tNIFA Research Misconduct page: https://nifa.usda.gov/research-misconduct\
  \ \n11.)\t7 CFR Chapter 34: https://www.ecfr.gov/current/title-7/subtitle-B/chapter-XXXIV\n\
  12.)\tCapacity Program Distribution Schedules: https://www.nifa.usda.gov/capacity-program-distribution-schedules\n\
  13.)\tNIFA’s Competitive Peer-Review Process: https://www.nifa.usda.gov/nifa-peer-review-process-competitive-grant-applications"
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/791cf2fe6c904542b5ba1bbcbf3cc6e8/view
sub-agency: National Institute of Food and Agriculture
title: Grants for Agricultural Research, Special Research Grants
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=dca6f597af069934d00d35484cbde962
---
