---
agency: Department of Agriculture
applicant_types:
- Federal
- Individual/Family
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Quasi-public nonprofit institution/organization
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Direct Loans
- Project Grants
- Sale, Exchange, or Donation of Property or Goods
- Training
authorizations:
- text: Competitive, Special and Facilities Research Grant Act, Section 2(2)(b), 7
    U.S.C. 450i.. 7 U.S.C. &sect; 450i.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/uscode/7/450
beneficiary_types:
- Federal
- Individual/Family
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- Quasi-public nonprofit organization
- State
categories:
- Agricultural - Research and Development
cfda: '10.310'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=10.310
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: To establish a competitive grants program to provide funding for fundamental
  and applied research, extension, and education to address food and agricultural
  sciences.
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":448000000.0,"usa_spending_actual":399763547.71},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":429000000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":586513127.62},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":478587137.65}]'
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":210225467.44,"obligation":389702235.95},{"x":"2023","outlay":141563184.67,"obligation":610101549.72},{"x":"2024","outlay":12271205.87,"obligation":425415071.66}]'
permalink: /program/10.310.html
popular_name: (AFRI)
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "For FY 2016:\r\n\r\n(A) AFRI: Agricultural and Natural Resources Science\
    \ for Climate Variability and Change Challenge Area:\r\n\r\nFor FY 2016 the Program\
    \ anticipates making $8 million in new awards in the following areas:\r\n(1) Climate\
    \ and Land Use and\r\n(2) Climate Master Outreach and Extension.\r\n\r\nIt is\
    \ anticipated that $4 million will be provided to fund continuation awards made\
    \ between 2012 and 2013.  It is estimated that two awards will be made under priority\
    \ area one and four under priority area two.\r\n\r\n(B) AFRI: Food Security:\r\
    \n\r\nFor FY 2016:\r\nThe Food Security Challenge Area is funded at $16.8 million\
    \ to support agricultural production research, education, and extension to develop\
    \ more sustainable, productive, and economically viable plant and animal production\
    \ systems. In FY 2016 the AFRI Food Security Challenge Area will invest in two\
    \ priority areas:\r\n(1) New Frontiers in Pollinator Health: From Research to\
    \ Applications; and\r\n(2) Breeding and Phenomics of Food Crops and Animals. \
    \ The request for applications was published with a closing date of July 7, 2016.\r\
    \nA total of 57 applications (35 for pollinator and 22 for breeding) were received\
    \ and are currently going through the peer panel review process.  It is anticipated\
    \ there will be 9 awards made representing 16% success rate.  Continuation awards\
    \ will also be made for projects awarded as continuation awards in earlier years.\r\
    \n\r\n(C ) AFRI: Food Safety Challenge Area:\r\n\r\nIn FY 2016, the Challenge\
    \ area anticipates making $6 million available for new awards, and $2,249,876\
    \ for continuation awards.  Applications for the FY 2016 are due by August 3,\
    \ 2016, and the Request for Applications is available on the agency’s website.\r\
    \n\r\n(D) AFRI: Sustainable Bioenergy:\r\n\r\nFor FY 2016 it is anticipated that\
    \ approximately 40 proposals will be reviewed and up to 4 new awards will be made\
    \ totaling up to $12 million; 2 CAP continuation awards were also made for totaling\
    \ $4 million under the Coordinated Agricultural Projects (CAP). It is also anticipated\
    \ that 18 proposals will be reviewed and up to 3 awards will be made totaling\
    \ $9 million under the Investing in America’s Scientific Corps: Preparing a New\
    \ Generation of Students, Faculty, and Workforce for Emerging Challenges in Bioenergy,\
    \ Bioproducts, and the Bioeconomy priority all under Sustainable Bioenergy Challenge\
    \ Area. Under AFRI Foundational Program, there will be two Research-only priorities\
    \ under Bioenergy, Natural Resource, and Environment (BNRE) Priority Area:\r\n\
    (1) Cover Crops, and\r\n(2) Socioeconomic Implications and Public Policy Challenges.\r\
    \n\r\nEstimated 30 proposals will be reviewed and up to 6 new awards will be made\
    \ for each priority; with two priorities totaling approximately $6 million.\r\n\
    \r\n(E) AFRI: Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Human Sciences Education\
    \ and Literacy Initiative (ELI):\r\n\r\nELI REEU Program: NIFA accepted 74 proposals\
    \ for review.  Approximately 16 award recommendations are anticipated. Anticipated\
    \ success rate for the program is ~22%.\r\n\r\nProfessional Development Opportunities\
    \ for Secondary School Teachers and Education Professionals (PD-STEP): In FY 2016,\
    \ as part of the ELI funding solicitation, a new opportunity titled, Professional\
    \ Development Opportunities for Secondary School Teachers and Education Professionals\
    \ (PD-STEP) is being offered. In FY 2016, for the ELI PD-STEP program, NIFA accepted\
    \ 32 proposals for review.\r\n\r\nApproximately 6 award recommendations are anticipated.\
    \ Anticipated success rate for the program is ~19%.\r\n\r\nPredoctoral and Postdoctoral\
    \ Fellowships: NIFA received 260 proposals.\r\n\r\nApproximately 75 award recommendations\
    \ are anticipated.\r\n\r\nApplications addressed the development of technical\
    \ and functional competence for predoctoral students, and the research independence\
    \ and teaching credentials of postdoctoral scientists in the agriculture, forestry,\
    \ and food sciences that are within NIFA’s challenge and foundational program\
    \ areas through well-developed and highly interactive mentoring and training activities.\r\
    \n\r\n(F) AFRI: Childhood Obesity Prevention Challenge Area:\r\n\r\nIn FY 2016,\
    \ NIFA anticipates $6.6 million will be available to support new awards.\r\n\r\
    \n(G) AFRI: Foundational Program:\r\n\r\nFor FY 2016 AFRI Foundational award cycle,\
    \ approximately, $130,000,000 is available to fund new proposals submitted to\
    \ the AFRI Foundational Program solicitation. Maximum award size is $500,000.\
    \ Proposals were solicited for 28 individual programs under the AFRI Foundational\
    \ Program Request for Applications.   Currently, all the programs are receiving\
    \ proposals. Therefore, complete data for the programs are not available at this\
    \ time.\r\n\r\n(H) Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases\r\n(w/NSF, NIH,\
    \ USDA and UK BBSRC):\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed for FY 2016.\r\n\r\n(I) Plant Feedstock\
    \ Genomics for Bioenergy: A Joint Research (USDA & DOE):\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed\
    \ for FY 2016.\r\n\r\n(J) AFRI: Water for Agriculture Challenge Area:\r\n\r\n\
    It is anticipated that 80 applications will be received and up to 11 new awards\
    \ will be granted in fiscal year (FY) 2016, totaling $10.7 million.\r\n\r\nEight\
    \ projects may be continued for a total continuation funding of $10 M.  The priorities\
    \ initiated in FY 2015 are continued in FY 2016:   Pmilliionogram code (8101)\
    \ focuses on watershed and regional scale projects that focus on the “right crop\
    \ in the right place with the right water.”  The goal of this program priority\
    \ is to conserve water through the development of cost- effective, adoptable and\
    \ sustainable practices and technologies for agricultural producers and processors.\
    \  The second priority (8102) deals with understanding decisions and behaviors\
    \ connected with agriculture and post-harvest processing industry water use.\r\
    \n\r\nFinally, program priority three (8103) is a partnership with EPA regarding\
    \ the understanding of human health impacts to exposure from nontraditional water\
    \ used in agriculture.  The Peer-review Panel will be held tentatively from November\
    \ 14-18, 2016.  No other data is available.\r\n\r\n(K) National Institute of Food\
    \ and Agriculture International Wheat Yield Partnership Program:\r\n\r\nThis program\
    \ is new in FY 2016. The program has received 22 applications requesting $37,570,199.\r\
    \n\r\nCurrently, these applications are undergoing review. Pertinent data to be\
    \ provided by Program at a future date.\r\n\r\nThe funded projects will support\
    \ new technologies that improve cereal breeding, and discoveries that lead to\
    \ significantly increase cereal production.\r\n\r\n(L) Carbon Cycle Science (InterAgency\
    \ NASA/DOE):\r\n\r\nNo solicitation in FY 2016.\r\n\r\n(M) Innovation at the Nexus\
    \ of Food, Energy and Water Systems\r\n(aka INFEWS):\r\n\r\nFor FY 2016 the program\
    \ anticipated making $5M in new awards in three areas:\r\n(1) FEW System Modeling;\r\
    \n(2) Visualization and Decision Support for Cyber-Human-Physical Systems at the\
    \ FEW Nexus; and\r\n(3) Research to Enable Innovative Solutions.\r\n\r\nThis program\
    \ is joint program with NSF.  NSF will anticipates contributing $25M in new awards\
    \ in the above three areas as well as 4) FEW Education and Workforce Development.\r\
    \n\r\nAll proposals were received by NSF and evaluated by joint panel.  For priority\
    \ 1, 100 applications were received and 5 will be funded by both agencies; for\
    \ priority 2, 35 applications were received and 2 will be funded by both agencies;\
    \ 150 applications were received and 6 will be funded by both agencies; and 19\
    \ applications were received and 2 will be funded by both agencies, one from each\
    \ the separate tracks.\r\n\r\n(N) Agricultural Greenhouse Gases:\r\n\r\nNo further\
    \ action is required. NIFA decided not to participate in the European Research\
    \ Area Net (ERA-NET) Solicitation as instructed by the Office of the Secretary\
    \ of Agriculture.\r\n\r\n(O) National Robotics Initiative:\r\n\r\nThe National\
    \ Science Foundation received 458 proposals (342 individual projects) that requested\
    \ approximately $322 million.  NIFA awarded five projects totaling $4.75 million\
    \ over 3 years.\r\n\r\n(P) NSF Cyber-Physical Systems:\r\n\r\nMore than 650 NSF-compliant\
    \ applications were received by this inter-agency program in FY 2016.  From those\
    \ applications that are relevant to the NIFA priorities for the program.\r\nNIFA\
    \ anticipates making 4-8 awards.\r\n\r\n(Q) Plant Biotic Interactions (PBI) Program:\r\
    \n\r\n$ 6 million will be available for awards from NIFA. Since this program is\
    \ offered in partnership with NSF, NSF will provide an additional $8.5 million\
    \ but not all of that amount will be available for new awards.\r\n251 applications\
    \ will be reviewed.\r\nNo awards have been made yet but it is anticipated that\
    \ NIFA will make approximately 10 awards.\r\n\r\n\r\n \r\nThe following represents\
    \ accomplishments for active Programs:\r\n\r\n(A) AFRI: Agricultural and Natural\
    \ Resources Science for Climate Variability and Change\r\n\r\nIn Fiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2016 the AFRI Climate Change Challenge Area invested in the following priority\
    \ areas: \r\n(1) Climate and Land Use and \r\n(2) Climate Masters\r\n\r\nThe Climate\
    \ Change Challenge Area was funded at $13.9 million to support agricultural production\
    \ research, education, and extension to how the mosaic of land use types affect\
    \ and are affected by climate variability and change through integrated projects\
    \ that focus on sustainable intensive agricultural systems, including crop, livestock,\
    \ and forestry production.. \r\n\r\nThe due date for the Climate Master’s program\
    \ was September 14, 2016.  A total of 10 application were received and subjected\
    \ to the peer panel review process.  Four (4) awards made, representing a 40%\
    \ success rate.  \r\n\r\nThe request for applications was published with a closing\
    \ date of Nov 16, 2016 for the Climate and Land Use area.  A total of 30 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. Five (5)\
    \ awards made, representing a 17% success rate.  \r\n\r\nFunding was also provided\
    \ for prior years’ Continuation awards.\r\n\r\n(C ) AFRI: Food Safety \r\n\r\n\
    In Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 the Antimicrobial Resistance program in the Food Safety\
    \ Challenge Area mad awards totaling about $4.8 million.  The program received\
    \ 44 proposals and funded a total of five (5) grant projects.  Funded projects\
    \ included four (4) Standard Research grants at $4,799,994.00 and one (1) Conference\
    \ grant at $50,000.\r\n\r\n(D) AFRI: Sustainable Bioenergy\r\n\r\nFor Fiscal Year\
    \ (FY) 2016, two (2) New continuation awards were made under the Coordinated Agricultural\
    \ Projects (CAP) program. Three (3) new awards were made totaling $9 million under\
    \ the Investing in America’s Scientific Corps: Preparing a New Generation of Students,\
    \ Faculty, and Workforce for Emerging Challenges in Bioenergy, Bioproducts, and\
    \ the Bioeconomy priority all under Sustainable Bioenergy Challenge Area. \r\n\
    \r\n(E) AFRI: Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Human Sciences Education\
    \ and Literacy Initiative (ELI)\r\n\r\nNOTE: Formerly AFRI Fellowships\r\n\r\n\
    • ELI Research and Extension Experiential Learning for Undergraduates (REEU) Program:\
    \ NIFA accepted 75 proposals for review.  18 award recommendations were executed.\
    \  The success rate for the program was ~24%.  Applications addressed the goal\
    \ of promoting research and extension experiential learning for undergraduates\
    \ such that upon graduation they may enter the agriculture workforce with exceptional\
    \ skills. \r\n• Professional Development Opportunities for Secondary School Teachers\
    \ and Education Professionals (PD-STEP): NIFA accepted 31 proposals for review.\
    \  14 award recommendations were executed. The success rate for the program is\
    \ ~44%.\r\n• Predoctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships: NIFA received 260 proposals.\
    \  115 award recommendations were executed.  The success rate for the program\
    \ was ~40%.  Applications addressed the development of technical and functional\
    \ competence for predoctoral students, and the research independence and teaching\
    \ credentials of postdoctoral scientists in the agriculture, forestry, and food\
    \ sciences that are within NIFA’s challenge and foundational program areas through\
    \ well-developed and highly interactive mentoring and training activities.\r\n\
    \r\n(F) AFRI: Childhood Obesity Prevention:\r\n\r\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2016\
    \ award cycle, approximately $6.6 million was available for project grant awards.\
    \  \r\n\r\nFifty-one applications requesting a total of $157,552,541 were received\
    \ in this year’s competition.  In November 2016, a 15-member peer review panel\
    \ evaluated these applications. The peer panel includes faculty from 1862 land\
    \ grant universities, Minority Serving Institutions, private universities, USDA-EPSCoR\
    \ states, and small and mid-sized universities.\r\n\r\nFunds were available to\
    \ support research, education and extension efforts for four (4) standard awards,\
    \ two (2) conference award and two (2) strengthening awards that addressed the\
    \ childhood obesity prevention program.  \r\n\r\nThe funding ratio for this program\
    \ for FY 2016 was 13%.\r\n\r\n(G) AFRI: Foundational Program:\r\n\r\nIn Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2016, AFRI Foundational Program invested $130 million to support biological\
    \ research, education and extension programs. \r\n\r\nThe request for applications\
    \ were published under 28 program area priorities:  \r\n1) Foundational Knowledge\
    \ of Agricultural Production - The closing date for applications was August 17,\
    \ 2016. A total of 48 applications were received and were subjected to the peer\
    \ panel review process. Ten (10) awards were made, representing a 21% success\
    \ rate.\r\n2) Pests and Beneficial Species in Agricultural Production Systems\
    \ - The closing date for applications was July 21, 2016. A total of 152 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 21 awards\
    \ were made, representing a 14% success rate.\r\n3) Physiology of Agricultural\
    \ Plants – The closing date for applications was August 11, 2016. A total of 150\
    \ applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process.\
    \ 25 awards were made, representing a 17% success rate.\r\n4) Plant Breeding for\
    \ Agricultural Production - The closing date for applications was July 28, 2016.\
    \ A total of 72 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel\
    \ review process. 19 awards were made, representing a 26% success rate.\r\n5)\
    \ Animal Reproduction - The closing date for applications was July 14, 2016. A\
    \ total of 62 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel\
    \ review process. 16 awards were made, representing a 26% success rate.\r\n6)\
    \ Animal Nutrition, Growth and Lactation - The closing date for applications was\
    \ July 14, 2016. A total of 92 applications were received and were subjected to\
    \ the peer panel review process. 17 awards were made, representing an 18% success\
    \ rate.\r\n7) Animal Well-Being - The closing date for applications was July 14,\
    \ 2016. A total of 19 applications were received and were subjected to the peer\
    \ panel review process. 2awards were made, representing an 11% success rate.\r\
    \n8) Animal Health and Disease - The closing date for applications was July 14,\
    \ 2016. A total of 155 applications were received and were subjected to the peer\
    \ panel review process. 33 awards were made, representing a 21% success rate.\r\
    \n9) Tools and Resources – Animal Breeding, Genetics and Genomics - The closing\
    \ date for applications was August 3, 2016. A total of 28 applications were received\
    \ and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 7 awards were made, representing\
    \ a 25% success rate.\r\n10) Tools and Resources – Immune Reagents for Agricultural\
    \ Animals- The closing date for applications was July 14, 2016. A total of 2 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. One (1) award\
    \ was made, representing a 50% success rate.\r\n11) Improving Food Safety - The\
    \ closing date for applications was August 10, 2016. A total of 119 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 22 awards\
    \ were made, representing an 18% success rate.\r\n12) Improving Food Quality -\
    \ The closing date for applications was July 14, 2016. A total of 94 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 17 awards\
    \ were made, representing an 18% success rate.\r\n13) Understanding Antimicrobial\
    \ Resistance - The closing date for applications was August 17, 2016. A total\
    \ of 30 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel review\
    \ process. Two (2) awards were made, representing a 7% success rate.\r\n14) Function\
    \ and Efficacy of Nutrients - The closing date for applications was July 14, 2016.\
    \ A total of 87 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel\
    \ review process. 14 awards were made, representing a 16% success rate.\r\n15)\
    \ Nitrogen and Phosphorus Cycling - The closing date for applications was July\
    \ 21, 2016. A total of 51 applications were received and were subjected to the\
    \ peer panel review process. 13 awards were made, representing a 25% success rate.\r\
    \n16) Agroecosystem Management - The closing date for applications was July 21,\
    \ 2016. A total of 57 applications were received and were subjected to the peer\
    \ panel review process. 12 awards were made, representing a 21% success rate.\r\
    \n17) Cover Crops for Bioenergy and Biobased Products - The closing date for applications\
    \ was July 21, 2016. A total of 10 applications were received and were subjected\
    \ to the peer panel review process. Five (5) awards were made, representing a\
    \ 50% success rate.\r\n18) Socioeconomic Implications and Public Policy Challenges\
    \ of Bioenergy and Bioproducts Market Development and Expansion - The closing\
    \ date for applications was July 21, 2016. A total of 22 applications were received\
    \ and were subjected to the peer panel review process. Five (5) awards were made,\
    \ representing a 23% success rate.\r\n19) Agricultural Engineering - The closing\
    \ date for applications was July 13, 2016. A total of 53 applications were received\
    \ and were subjected to the peer panel review process. Nine (9) awards were made,\
    \ representing a 17% success rate.\r\n20) Bioprocessing and Bioengineering - The\
    \ closing date for applications was July 13, 2016. A total of 71 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. Eight (8)\
    \ awards were made, representing 11% success rate.\r\n21) Nanotechnology for Agricultural\
    \ and Food Systems - The closing date for applications was July 13, 2016. A total\
    \ of 88 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel review\
    \ process. 14 awards were made, representing a 16% success rate.\r\n22) Economics,\
    \ Markets and Trade - The closing date for applications was August 11, 2016. A\
    \ total of 48 applications were received and were subjected to the peer panel\
    \ review process. 13 awards were made, representing a 27% success rate.\r\n23)\
    \ Environmental and Natural Resources Economics - The closing date for applications\
    \ was August 18, 2016. A total of 38 applications were received and were subjected\
    \ to the peer panel review process. Ten (10) awards were made, representing a\
    \ 26% success rate.\r\n24) Behavioral and Experimental Economic Applications for\
    \ Agri-Environmental Policy Design - The closing date for applications was July\
    \ 14, 2016. A total of 3 applications were received and were subjected to the\
    \ peer panel review process. 2 awards were made, representing a 67% success rate.\r\
    \n25) Small and Medium-sized Farms - The closing date for applications was August\
    \ 25, 2016. A total of 32 applications were received and were subjected to the\
    \ peer panel review process. Ten (10) awards were made, representing a 31% success\
    \ rate.\r\n26) Innovation for Rural Entrepreneurs and Communities - The closing\
    \ date for applications was August 31, 2016. A total of 52 applications were received\
    \ and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 16 awards were made, representing\
    \ a 31% success rate.\r\n27) Critical Agricultural Research and Extension - The\
    \ closing date for applications was July 14, 2016. A total of 35 applications\
    \ were received and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 17 awards\
    \ were made, representing a 49% success rate.\r\n28) Exploratory Research – There\
    \ is no closing date for Letter of Intent and the closing date for applications\
    \ are 60 days after the encouragement to submit the full application based on\
    \ the assessment of Letter of Intent. A total of 68 applications were received\
    \ and were subjected to the peer panel review process. 12 awards were made, representing\
    \ an 18% success rate.\r\n\r\n(I) Joint Plant Feedstock:\r\n\r\nWithin this interagency\
    \ program NIFA recommended and funded to awards totaling $2 million in FY 2016.\r\
    \n\r\n(J) AFRI: Water (for Agriculture):\r\n\r\nThe AFRI: Water for Food Production\
    \ Systems (WFPS) represents a newly funded program, which did not exist in FY\
    \ 2016.  \r\n\r\n(M) Innovation at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems\
    \ (INFEWS):\r\n\r\nDuring Fiscal Year (FY) 2016 the program made $5 million in\
    \ new awards two (2) areas: \r\n\r\n(1) Food, Energy, and Water System (FEW) Modeling;\
    \ and\r\n\r\n(2) Visualization and Decision Support for Cyber-Human-Physical Systems\
    \ at the FEW Nexus. \r\n\r\nNIFA fully funded two (2) awards. This program is\
    \ joint program with the National Science Foundation (NSF).  NSF fully funded\
    \ 17 awards, contributing $35 million in new awards in the above three \r\n(3)\
    \ areas as well as four (4) FEW Education and Workforce Development. \r\n\r\n\
    All proposals were received by NSF and evaluated by joint panel.  \r\n\r\nFor\
    \ priority 1, 100 applications were received, two (2) were jointly funded by both\
    \ agencies and four (4) were funded by NSF. \r\nFor priority 2, 35 applications\
    \ were received; one (1) was funded by NIFA and two (2) by NSF.\r\n\r\nThe following\
    \ Programs are no longer funded: hence, no action is required:\r\n\r\n(B) AFRI:\
    \ Food Security\r\n\r\n(L) International Wheat Yield Partnership\r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2017 the Appropriations amount for the Agriculture\
    \ & Food Research Initiative Grants Program (AFRI) was $375, 000,000.\n\nThe amount\
    \ available for awards was $342,971,061 after legislatively mandated set-asides.\n\
    \nFiscal Year (FY) 2017 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(C ) AFRI: Food Safety: \n\nIn\
    \ FY 2017, the Antimicrobial Resistance program in the Food Safety Challenge area\
    \ made awards totaling over $10 million. \n\nThe program received 47 proposals\
    \ and funded a total of ten (10) grant projects.  Funded projects included nine\
    \ (9) Standard Integrated and one (1) Standard Strengthening Integrated grants.\n\
    \n(D) AFRI: Sustainable Bioenergy:\n\nTwo (2) continuation awards were made under\
    \ the Coordinated Agricultural Projects (CAP) program.\n \nEleven (11) awards\
    \ were made under the Bioenergy Lignin or Nano-cellulosic Co Products from Biomass\
    \ Feedstocks and six (6) Biomass Feedstock Genetic Development and Evaluation\
    \ program areas. \n\n(F) AFRI: Childhood Obesity Prevention:\n\nFor the Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2017 award cycle, approximately $8.6 million was available for project\
    \ grant awards.  \n\nSixty-four applications requesting a total of $134,525,404\
    \ were received in this year’s competition.  In September 2017, a 15-member peer\
    \ review panel evaluated these applications. The peer panel includes faculty from\
    \ 1862 land grant universities, Minority Serving Institutions, private universities,\
    \ USDA-EPSCoR states, and small and mid-sized universities.\n\nFunds were available\
    \ to support research, education and extension efforts for four (4) standard awards,\
    \ one (1) conference award and one (1) strengthening awards that addressed the\
    \ childhood obesity prevention program.  \n\nThe funding ratio for this program\
    \ for FY 2017 was 7%.\n\n(G) AFRI: Foundational Program:\n\nFor FY 2017 AFRI Foundational\
    \ Program award cycle, a total budget of $169,000,500 was used to fund the new\
    \ awards from the applications submitted to 28 individual programs under the AFRI\
    \ Foundational Program solicitation. \n\nA total of 1949 applications were received\
    \ and 616 awards were made in this year’s AFRI Foundational Program competition.\
    \  \n\n(I) Joint Plant Feedstock:\n\nWithin this interagency program NIFA recommended\
    \ and funded to two (2) awards totaling $2 million ($1 million each). \n\n(J)\
    \ AFRI: Water (for Agriculture):\n\nThe AFRI Food Security and Water for Agriculture\
    \ Challenge Areas were consolidated into a new Challenge Area, Water for Food\
    \ Production Systems (WFPS), which sought approximately $34 million in FY 2017\
    \ to support projects that addressed current agricultural challenges to ensure\
    \ sustainable production of safe and nutritious food. A total of 87 applications\
    \ were received for a single priority:   \n\nThe WFPS RFA invited applications\
    \ that employed systems approaches that lead to solutions for water challenges\
    \ in U.S. agricultural production. These solutions must be feasible and simultaneously\
    \ take into consideration a broad spectrum of kinds of agricultural producers,\
    \ other competing industries, consumers and the communities where they live, and\
    \ other relevant stakeholders. The impacts will be measured as appropriate changes\
    \ needed by water users, consumers, and policy makers to improve resolution in\
    \ conflicts over water supplies by reducing water use or increasing water use\
    \ efficiency for the next several decades or more. NIFA’s customers considered\
    \ the WFPS the fourth year of the Water for Agriculture Program as a broader challenge\
    \ area to address critical water resources issues such as drought, excess soil\
    \ moisture, flooding, quality and productivity for food production in an agricultural\
    \ context. The program focused on developing solutions for water management that\
    \ linked food, water, climate, energy, and environmental issues. Funding was used\
    \ to develop management practices, technologies, and tools for farmers, ranchers,\
    \ forest owners and managers, public decision-makers, public and private managers\
    \ and citizens to improve food production while remaining true to conserving water\
    \ resource quantity and quality. \n\nNIFA’s approach linked social, economic,\
    \ and behavioral sciences with traditional biophysical sciences and engineering\
    \ to address local to regional scale issues with shared hydrological and agricultural\
    \ processes, and meteorological and basin characteristics. \n\nWFPS was restricted\
    \ to Coordinated Agricultural Projects (CAP) awards only (up to $5.2 M per project\
    \ over 5 years)—six CAPs, integrated across research and education or extension\
    \ and one capacity (FASE) CAP grant integrated across research and extension were\
    \ awarded to a set of U.S. four-year degree granting universities or colleges\
    \ with a wide geographic distribution for a total of $34,922,500.  Eleven CAP\
    \ projects were continued from awards in 2014, 2015 and 2016 for a total of $13,333,128.\
    \  \n\nA grand total for FY 2017 funding for Water for Agriculture and Water for\
    \ Food Production Systems was $47,255,628.\n\n(M) Innovation at the Nexus of Food,\
    \ Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS):\n\nDuring Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 the program\
    \ made $5 million in new awards under two (2) areas: \n(1) Food, Energy, and Water\
    \ System (FEW) Modeling; and\n(2) Research to Enable Innovative System Solutions.\
    \ \nThis program is joint program with the National Science Foundation (NSF).\
    \  NSF fully funded 16 awards, contributing $36 million in new awards in the above\
    \ two (2) areas as well as Visualization and Decision Support for Cyber-Human-Physical\
    \ Systems at the FEW Nexus. All proposals were received by NSF and evaluated by\
    \ joint panels.  \n\nThe NSF received roughly 375 proposals for the 20 awards\
    \ funded between NSF and USDA NIFA.\n(N) AFRI - Education and Workforce Development:\n\
    \n•\tResearch and Extension Experiential Learning for Undergraduates (REEU) Program:\
    \ NIFA accepted 75 proposals for review.  18 award recommendations were executed.\
    \  The success rate for the program was ~24%.  Applications addressed the goal\
    \ of promoting research and extension experiential learning for undergraduates\
    \ such that upon graduation they may enter the agriculture workforce with exceptional\
    \ skills. \n\n•\tProfessional Development Opportunities for Secondary School Teachers\
    \ and Education Professionals (PD-STEP): NIFA accepted 38 proposals for review.\
    \  8 award recommendations were executed. The success rate for the program is\
    \ ~21%.\n\n•\tPredoctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships: NIFA received 222 proposals.\
    \  110 proposals were recommended for funding.  Applications addressed the development\
    \ of new scientists and professionals to enter research, education, and extension\
    \ fields within the Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Human Sciences,\
    \ and focused upon at least one of the six Farm Bill priority areas.\n\n(O) AFRI\
    \ - Sustainable Agricultural Systems:\n\nNot Applicable. This Program was not\
    \ yet funded in FY 2017.\n\n(P) Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics Research\
    \ for Accelerated Animal Breeding (Joint NIH Project):\n\nNot Applicable. This\
    \ Program was not yet funded in FY 2017.\n\n(Q) Cyber-Physical System Program\
    \ (Interagency Solicitation):\n\nThis is a joint program with several agencies\
    \ where National Science Foundation was the lead agency that received the applications.\
    \ NIFA encourages projects that advance science and technology applied to Smart\
    \ & Connected Communities (both rural and urban) and real-time agricultural data\
    \ analytics and control. All applications for FY 2017 involved real-time agricultural\
    \ data analytics and control. A total budget of $5,000,000 from NIFA was used\
    \ to fund seven awards. Awards for FY 2017 were distributed between cropping systems\
    \ and animal agriculture.      \n\n(R) National Robotics Initiative:\n\nThis is\
    \ a joint program with several agencies where National Science Foundation was\
    \ the lead agency that received the applications. NIFA encourages robotics research,\
    \ applications, and education to enhance agricultural production, processing,\
    \ and distribution systems that benefit consumers and rural communities. A total\
    \ budget of $2,769,222 was used from NIFA to fund three applications submitted\
    \ to this program. Awards for FY 2017 were equally distributed between cropping\
    \ systems, animal agriculture, and aquaculture.    \n\n(S) Joint NIFA/NSF Plant\
    \ and Animal Microbiome – DCL:\n\nThe Dear Colleague Letter: NSF-USDA-BBSRC Joint\
    \ Funding Opportunity was developed.\n\n(T) NSF-NIFA Plant Biotic Interactions\
    \ Program:\n\nFor FY 2017, the available funding for awards in the NSF-NIFA Plant\
    \ Biotic Interactions Program was $8,962,504.\n\nThe listing below represents\
    \ Programs which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required\
    \ (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\n(A) AFRI: Agricultural and Natural\
    \ Resources Science for Climate Variability and Change;\n\n(B) AFRI: Food Security;\n\
    \n(E) AFRI: Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Human Sciences Education\
    \ and Literacy Initiative (ELI);\n\nNOTE: Formerly known as AFRI Fellowships;\
    \ and \n\n(L) International Wheat Yield Partnership."
  year: '2017'
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2018 the Appropriations amount for the Agriculture\
    \ & Food Research Initiative Grants Program (AFRI) was $400 million.\n\nThe amount\
    \ available for awards was $365,236,233 after legislatively mandated set-asides.\n\
    \nFiscal Year (FY) 2018 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(D) AFRI: Sustainable Bioenergy:\n\
    \nFor FY 2018, (2) continuation awards (from FY 2017 projects) were made under\
    \ the Coordinated Agricultural Projects (CAP) program totaling $8,043,000. No\
    \ new awards were funded under the Sustainable Bioenergy and Bioproducts (SBEBP)\
    \ Challenge Area.\n\n(G) AFRI: Foundational and Applied Science Program:\n\nFor\
    \ FY 2018 AFRI Foundational and Applied Science (formerly known as AFRI Foundational\
    \ Program) award cycle, $182 million is available to fund new applications submitted\
    \ to the FY 2018 AFRI Foundational and Applied Science Program solicitation. Applications\
    \ were solicited for 35 individual programs.  A total of 2,229 applications requesting\
    \ $1,088,039,322 were received by the programs. A total of 438 awards have been\
    \ finalized. A few more number of awards are being currently finalized. \n\n(I)\
    \ Joint Plant Feedstock:\n\nTwo (2) projects funded at $1 million each.\n\n(J)\
    \ AFRI: Water for Food Production Systems Challenge Area (WFPS):\n\nFiscal Year\
    \ (FY) 2018:\nThe AFRI Water for Food Production Systems Challenge Area (WFPS)\
    \ acted as an interim program between the Water For Agriculture Coordinated Agricultural\
    \ Projects (CAPs) and standard grants through to the Sustainable Agricultural\
    \ Systems (SAS), a broad, systems of systems focused program that focused on all\
    \ agricultural systems, not just water or food production. In FY 2018 we completed\
    \ the awards for WFPS spending approximately $34 million to support projects that\
    \ addressed current agricultural challenges to ensure sustainable production of\
    \ safe and nutritious food. A total of 87 applications were received for a single\
    \ priority. The WFPS RFA invited applications that employed systems approaches\
    \ that lead to solutions for water challenges in U.S. agricultural production.\
    \ These solutions must be feasible and simultaneously take into consideration\
    \ a broad spectrum of kinds of agricultural producers, other competing industries,\
    \ consumers and the communities where they live, and other relevant stakeholders.\
    \ FY 2018 was year 1 for all of the awarded projects. The impacts will continue\
    \ to be measured as appropriate changes needed by water users, consumers, and\
    \ policy makers to improve resolution in conflicts over water supplies by reducing\
    \ water use or increasing water use efficiency for the next several decades or\
    \ more. The awards focused on developing solutions for water management that linked\
    \ food, water, climate, energy, and environmental issues. Funding was used to\
    \ develop management practices, technologies, and tools for farmers, ranchers,\
    \ forest owners and managers, public decision-makers, public and private managers\
    \ and citizens to improve food production while remaining true to conserving water\
    \ resource quantity and quality. The WFPS approach linked social, economic, and\
    \ behavioral sciences with traditional biophysical sciences and engineering to\
    \ address local to regional scale issues with shared hydrological and agricultural\
    \ processes, and meteorological and basin characteristics. WFPS was restricted\
    \ to Coordinated Agricultural Projects (CAP) awards only (up to $5.2 million per\
    \ project over 5 years)—seven CAPs, integrated across research and education or\
    \ extension and one capacity (FASE) CAP grant integrated across research and extension\
    \ were awarded to a set of U.S. four-year degree granting universities or colleges\
    \ with a wide geographic distribution for a total of $34,922,500.\n\n(M) Innovation\
    \ at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS):\n\nUSDA NIFA leadership\
    \ reallocated the $5 million set aside for the FY 2018 INFEWS program to the AFRI\
    \ Water for Food Production.\n\nProgram continuation awards to cover a shortfall\
    \ in the program.\n\nUSDA NIFA did not fund any NEW awards in FY 2018.  \nFunding\
    \ for awards in FY 2018 supported FY 2017 continuation awards.\n\nFurther, NSF\
    \ did not fund any new awards in FY 2018.\n\n(N) AFRI - Education and Workforce\
    \ Development (EWD):\n•\tResearch and Extension Experiential Learning for Undergraduates\
    \ (REEU) Program: NIFA accepted 78 proposals for review.  17 award recommendations\
    \ were executed.  The success rate for the program was 22%.  Applications promoted\
    \ research and extension experiential learning for undergraduates such that upon\
    \ graduation they may enter the agriculture workforce with exceptional skills.\
    \ \n\n•\tProfessional Development Opportunities for Secondary School Teachers\
    \ and Education Professionals (PD-STEP): NIFA accepted 48 proposals for review.\
    \ 21 award recommendations were executed. The success rate for the program is\
    \ ~43.75%. Applications supported immersive learning in non-formal educational\
    \ programs for secondary school educators\n\n•\tPredoctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships:\
    \ NIFA received 280 proposals.  146 proposals were recommended for funding.  Applications\
    \ addressed the development of new scientists and professionals to enter research,\
    \ education, and extension fields within the Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources,\
    \ and Human Sciences, and focused upon at least one of the six Farm Bill priority\
    \ areas.\n\n(O) AFRI - Sustainable Agricultural Systems (SAS):\n\nThis is a new\
    \ program in FY 2018 focused on sustainably increasing agricultural production\
    \ in a way that accounts for diminishing natural resources, changing climate conditions,\
    \ and increasing plant and animal disease threats. \n\nThe AFRI SAS Program processed\
    \ eight (8) awards totaling $77,853,248.  \n\n(P) Comparative and Evolutionary\
    \ Genomics Research for Accelerated Animal Breeding (Joint NIH Project) (aka CEG):\n\
    \nThis program was not funded in Fiscal Year 2018.\n\n\n\n(Q) Cyber-Physical System\
    \ Program (Interagency Solicitation):\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2018\nThis is a joint\
    \ program with several agencies where National Science Foundation was the lead\
    \ agency that received the applications. NIFA encourages projects that advance\
    \ science and technology applied to Smart & Connected Communities (both rural\
    \ and urban) and real-time agricultural data analytics and control. A total budget\
    \ of $5 million from NIFA was used to fund five awards. Four awards for FY 2018\
    \ involved real-time agricultural data analytics and control and one award involved\
    \ Smart and Connected Communities. Awards for FY 2018 were distributed between\
    \ cropping systems and animal agriculture.\n\n(R) National Robotics Initiative:\n\
    \nFiscal Year (FY) 2018:\nThis is a joint program with several agencies where\
    \ National Science Foundation was the lead agency that received the applications.\
    \ NIFA encourages robotics research, applications, and education to enhance agricultural\
    \ production, processing, and distribution systems that benefit consumers and\
    \ rural communities. A total budget of $5,694,935 from NIFA was used to fund ten\
    \ (10) awards. Awards for FY 2018 were distributed between cropping systems, animal\
    \ agriculture, forestry, and aquaculture.\n\n(S) Joint NIFA/NSF Plant and Animal\
    \ Microbiome – DCL (aka EAGERS):\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2018:\nThe Dear Colleague\
    \ Letter was published on January 5, 2018. https://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2018/nsf18039/nsf18039.jsp?WT.mc_id=USNSF_179\
    \  \n\nTwo-page summaries (134) were received by March 14, 2018, of which 39 were\
    \ encouraged to submit a full application.  A total of 39 applications were received\
    \ for review by July 16, 2018.  \n\nThe Program anticipated 20 awards of which\
    \ NIFA anticipated to fund ten (10) awards with $3 million funding from the FY\
    \ 2018 AFRI Foundational and Applied Science Program: Plant breeding program for\
    \ agricultural production program area priority.\n\n(T) NSF-NIFA Plant Biotic\
    \ Interactions Program (PBI):\n\nThe NSF/NIFA Plant Biotic Interactions Program\
    \ supports research on processes that mediate beneficial and antagonistic interactions\
    \ between plants and their viral, bacterial, oomycete, fungal, parasitic plant\
    \ and invertebrate symbionts, pathogens and pests.  It supports research along\
    \ the entire range from basic to translational/applied.\n\nThe NSF-NIFA Plant\
    \ Biotic Interactions Program has not yet made any awards with FY 2018 funds,\
    \ but is processing nine (9) awards totaling $6,887,479.  \n\n(U) Signals in the\
    \ Soil (SitS) Program:\n\nN/A – Joint program was not funded until FY 2019.\n\n\
    The listing below represents AFRI Programs which have not been recently funded.\
    \ Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\
    \n(A) Agricultural and Natural Resources Science for Climate Variability and Change;\n\
    (B) Food Security;\n(C) Food Safety;\n(E) Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources\
    \ and Human Sciences Education and Literacy Initiative (ELI);\nNOTE: Formerly\
    \ known as AFRI Fellowships.\n(F) Childhood Obesity Prevention;\n(H) Ecology and\
    \ Evolution of Infectious Diseases (Joint Project with NSF, NIH, USDA and UK BBSRC);\n\
    (L) International Wheat Yield Partnership; and\nIntegrated Biorefinery Optimization\
    \ (Joint Project with DOE)."
  year: '2018'
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2019 the Appropriations amount for the Agriculture\
    \ & Food Research Initiative Grants Program (AFRI) was $415 million.\n\nThe amount\
    \ available for awards was $378,828,821 after legislatively mandated set-asides.\n\
    \nFiscal Year (FY) 2019 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(D) AFRI: Sustainable Bioenergy:\n\
    \nFor FY 2019, two (2) continuation awards have been awarded totaling $7,525,000\
    \ using FY 2018 funds.\n\n(G) AFRI: Foundational and Applied Sciences Program:\n\
    \nFor FY 2019, AFRI Foundational and Applied Science (FAS) award cycle, approximately\
    \ $192,585,000 is available to fund new applications submitted to the FY 2019\
    \ AFRI FAS Program Solicitation. Applications were solicited for 35 individual\
    \ programs. \n\nCurrently, all the programs are either receiving applications\
    \ or the program staff is screening applications submitted to the programs. Therefore,\
    \ complete data for the Foundational and Applied Science program is not available\
    \ at this time.\n\n(I) Joint Plant Feedstock:\n\nN/A – Additional funding is not\
    \ anticipated for this Program.\n\n(J) AFRI: Water for Food Production Systems\
    \ Challenge Area (WFPS);\n\nSeven (7) WFPS projects were fully funded and completing\
    \ year 2 activities in FY 2019. WFPS was not appropriated by Congress in FY 2019,\
    \ so the cycle of RFA, proposal submission, review and award was not realized\
    \ in FY 2019. Post award management continued for the seven awarded CAPs from\
    \ FYs 2017 & 2018—all projects appear to be spending their funds appropriately\
    \ and completing their proposed objectives in a timely manner.\n\n(M) Innovation\
    \ at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS):\n\nUSDA NIFA allocated\
    \ $7 million for support of the INFEWS program.  $5 million will support funding\
    \ the continuation portion of the four (4) FY 2017 awards and $2 million will\
    \ cover the first year of funding for three (3) new awards.\n\nThe NSF received\
    \ approximately 280 proposals for the 18 awards funded between NSF and USDA NIFA.\n\
    \nNSF funded 15 additional awards at approximately $20 million.\n\n(N) AFRI -\
    \ Education and Workforce Development (EWD):\n\n•\tProfessional Development for\
    \ Agricultural Literacy (PDAL) Program Formerly known as “Professional Development\
    \ Opportunities for Secondary School Teachers and Education Professionals (PD-STEP)”:\
    \ Peer-review for this program has not taken place. 28 proposals have been accepted\
    \ for review and 10 award recommendations are anticipated. The projected success\
    \ rate for the program is approximately 35%.\n\n•\tAgricultural Workforce Training\
    \ Program (AWT): Peer-review for this program has not taken place. 63 letters\
    \ of intent were received. Application deadline is August 22, 2019. This program\
    \ is being first offered in FY 2019.\n\n•\tREEU Program: Peer-review for this\
    \ program has not taken place. 63 proposals have been accepted and 20 award recommendations\
    \ are anticipated. The projected success rate for the program is ~32%.\n\n•\t\
    Predoctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships: Peer-review for this program has not\
    \ taken place. Approximately 240 proposals and 120 award recommendations are anticipated.\
    \ \n\n(O) AFRI - Sustainable Agricultural Systems (SAS):\n\nA total budget of\
    \ $90 million is available to fund new application to this program. Currently,\
    \ NIFA is receiving applications for the program. \n\nPertinent details will be\
    \ provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(P) Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics\
    \ Research for Accelerated Animal Breeding (Joint NIH Project) (aka CEG):\n\n\
    This program did not make new awards based on panel rankings.\n\n(Q) Cyber-Physical\
    \ System Program (Interagency Solicitation):\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2019:\nThis is\
    \ a joint program with several agencies where National Science Foundation was\
    \ the lead agency that received the applications. NIFA encourages projects that\
    \ advance science and technology applied to Smart & Connected Communities (both\
    \ rural and urban) and real-time agricultural data analytics and control. It is\
    \ anticipated that a total budget of $5 million from NIFA will be used to fund\
    \ approximately six (6) awards.\n\n(R) National Robotics Initiative:\n\nFiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2019:\nThis is a joint program with several agencies where National\
    \ Science Foundation was the lead agency that received the applications. NIFA\
    \ encourages robotics research, applications, and education to enhance agricultural\
    \ production, processing, and distribution systems that benefit consumers and\
    \ rural communities. A total budget of $4,344,032 from NIFA was used to fund eleven\
    \ (11) awards. Awards for FY 2019 were distributed between commodity and specialty\
    \ cropping systems.\n\n(S) Joint NIFA/NSF Plant and Animal Microbiome – DCL (aka\
    \ EAGERS):\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2019:\n10 projects were funded by NIFA in Early\
    \ Concept Grants for Exploratory Research totaling $3 million.\n\nThe following\
    \ are selected examples of funded projects:\n•\tAdvancing Hybrid Wheat Production\
    \ through the Use of Novel Pathways for Male Sterility;\n•\tNovel Delivery Systems\
    \ for Efficient CRISPR/CAS9 Gene Editing in Plant Cells;\n•\tSmart Agricultural\
    \ Biotechnology With Nanoparticle-Enabled Plant Transformations;\n•\tUnified Big\
    \ Data in Genomics and Phenomics for Plant Breeding; and\n•\tUtilizing High Phenotyping\
    \ Approaches to Advance Plant Breeding.\n\n(T) NSF-NIFA Plant Biotic Interactions\
    \ Program (PBI):\n\nNIFA anticipates that the funding available for the NSF-NIFA\
    \ Plant Biotic Interactions Program in FY 2019 will be $7 million. The NSF-NIFA\
    \ Plant Biotic Interactions Program has not yet made any research awards with\
    \ FY 2019 funds.\n\n(U) Signals in the Soil (SitS) Program:\n\nNIFA will fund\
    \ two (2) projects totally $1,149,717. \n\nThe listing below represents AFRI Programs\
    \ which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N)\
    \ for the following Programs:  \n\n(A) Agricultural and Natural Resources Science\
    \ for Climate Variability and Change;\n(B) Food Security;\n(C) Food Safety;\n\
    (E) Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Human Sciences Education and Literacy\
    \ Initiative (ELI);\nNOTE: Formerly known as AFRI Fellowships.\n(F) Childhood\
    \ Obesity Prevention;\n(H) Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases (Joint\
    \ Project with NSF, NIH, USDA and UK BBSRC);\n(L) International Wheat Yield Partnership;\
    \ and\nIntegrated Biorefinery Optimization (Joint Project with DOE)."
  year: '2019'
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2020 the projected per the President’s Budget for\
    \ the Agriculture & Food Research Initiative Grants Program (AFRI) is $500 million.\n\
    \nThe projected amount available for awards was $457,613,568 after legislatively\
    \ mandated set-asides.\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2020 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(D) AFRI:\
    \ Sustainable Bioenergy:\n\nN/A – Additional funding is not anticipated for this\
    \ Program.\n\n(G) AFRI: Foundational and Applied Sciences Program:\n\nThe FY 2020\
    \ funding levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.\
    \  \n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(I)\
    \ Joint Plant Feedstock:\n\nN/A – Additional funding is not anticipated for this\
    \ Program.\n\n(J) AFRI: Water for Food Production Systems Challenge Area (WFPS):\n\
    \nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.\
    \ \n\nIf this Program is funded in FY 2020, it is projected that the funding level\
    \ will be comparable and the types of projects will be similar.\n\nPertinent details\
    \ will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(M) Innovation at the Nexus\
    \ of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS):\n\nIt is projected that $5 million\
    \ will be available for funding the continuation portion of the four (4) FY 2019\
    \ awards.\n\n(N) AFRI - Education and Workforce Development (EWD):\n\nData is\
    \ not yet available. \n\nPertinent details to be provided by program at a future\
    \ date. \n\n\n\n(O) AFRI - Sustainable Agricultural Systems (SAS):\n\nThe FY 2020\
    \ funding levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.\
    \  \n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(P)\
    \ Comparative and Evolutionary Genomics Research for Accelerated Animal Breeding\
    \ (Joint NIH Project) (aka CEG):\n\nIt is projected that this Program will make\
    \ up to two (2) awards; totaling up to $3 million.\n\n(Q) Cyber-Physical System\
    \ Program (Interagency Solicitation):\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet\
    \ been established by Congressional Appropriations.  \n\nPertinent details will\
    \ be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(R) National Robotics Initiative:\n\
    \nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.\
    \  \n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(S)\
    \ Joint NIFA/NSF Plant and Animal Microbiome – DCL (aka EAGERS):\n\nThis program\
    \ is scheduled to sunset in FY 2020.  Thus, no information is available.\n\nPertinent\
    \ information will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(T) NSF-NIFA Plant\
    \ Biotic Interactions Program (PBI):\n\nNIFA projects that the funding available\
    \ for the NSF-NIFA Plant Biotic Interactions Program in FY 2020 will be $8 million.\n\
    \n(U) Signals in the Soil (SitS) Program:\n\nProjected minimum amount of $2.4\
    \ million, to support three (3) awards.\n\n\nThe listing below represents AFRI\
    \ Programs which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required\
    \ (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\n(A) Agricultural and Natural Resources\
    \ Science for Climate Variability and Change;\n(B) Food Security;\n(C) Food Safety;\n\
    (E) Food, Agriculture, Natural Resources and Human Sciences Education and Literacy\
    \ Initiative (ELI);\nNOTE: Formerly known as AFRI Fellowships.\n(F) Childhood\
    \ Obesity Prevention;\n(H) Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Diseases (Joint\
    \ Project with NSF, NIH, USDA and UK BBSRC);\n(L) International Wheat Yield Partnership;\
    \ and\nIntegrated Biorefinery Optimization (Joint Project with DOE)."
  year: '2020'
rules_regulations: "As an administrator of U.S. government support, NIFA works in\
  \ partnership with grantees to ensure responsible stewardship of federal funds.\
  \ Our grantees and partners are required to comply with all relevant rules and regulations.\
  \ The following resources are provided to NIFA’s partners and award recipients to\
  \ support their adherence to federal regulations governing program performance:\r\
  \n\r\nNIFA’s primary (main) website:\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/regulations-and-guidelines\r\
  \n\r\nThe following represent specific documents and direct links:\r\n\r\nPOLICY\
  \ GUIDE\r\nNIFA’s Federal Assistance Policy Guide describes agency policies and\
  \ procedures.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/policy-guide\r\n\r\nCERTIFICATIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS\r\
  \nCertifications and representations provided through the NIFA application process.\r\
  \nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/certifications-and-representations\r\n\r\nACKNOWLEDGEMENT\
  \ OF USDA SUPPORT BY NIFA\r\nWhen acknowledging USDA support in accordance with\
  \ 2 CFR Part 415, grantees must use the following acknowledgement for all projects\
  \ or initiatives supported by NIFA.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/acknowledgment-usda-support-nifa\r\
  \n\r\nFEDERAL REGULATIONS\r\nThe Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) lists all regulations\
  \ published in the Federal Register.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/federal-regulations\r\
  \n\r\nFOIA\r\nThe Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) provides that any person has\
  \ the right to request access to federal documents and information such as research\
  \ data.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/foia\r\n\r\nNEPA POLICY AND GUIDANCE\r\nThe National\
  \ Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Policy and Guidance set the standard for identifying\
  \ potential environmental impacts.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/nepa-policy-and-guidance\r\
  \n\r\nOGFM ISSUED CORRESPONDENCE\r\nThe Office of Grants and Financial Management\
  \ occasionally issues correspondence to applicants, grantees, and/or the general\
  \ public for informational or clarification purposes.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/ogfm-issued-correspondence\r\
  \n\r\nRESEARCH MISCONDUCT\r\nNIFA requires that all its awardees adhere to the USDA\
  \ Scientific Integrity Policy and the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct.\r\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/research-misconduct \r\n\r\nNIFA’S GENERAL AWARD TERMS AND\
  \ CONDITIONS\r\n\r\nAward terms and conditions are determined by statutory, regulatory,\
  \ and agency requirements, as well as each grant’s circumstances. Terms and conditions\
  \ dictate \r\nimportant items related to your grant, including method of payment,\
  \ reporting frequency and content, and prior approval requirements.\r\n\r\nReferences\
  \ to the terms and conditions of awards are located on the NIFA 2009 Award Fact\
  \ Sheet. NIFA's general award terms and conditions (see link below) is applicable\
  \ to this program, for awards with an award date on December 26, 2014 and thereafter.\r\
  \nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/resource/nifa-general-terms-and-conditions-grants-and-cooperative-agreements-october-2016.\r\
  \n \r\n"
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/1ec1c72b69874668811ceae4376bb708/view
sub-agency: National Institute of Food and Agriculture
tax_expenditures: null
title: 'Agriculture and Food Research Initiative (AFRI) '
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=702ed782eaa4c668b0df9b60cb6c5e3b
---
