---
agency: Department of Agriculture
applicant_types:
- Federal
- Minority group
- Other private institutions/organizations
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Direct Loans
- Investigation of Complaints
- Project Grants
- Sale, Exchange, or Donation of Property or Goods
- Use of Property, Facilities, or Equipment
authorizations:
- text: Competitive, Special, and Facilities Research Grant Act. Pub. L. 89, 106.
    7 U.S.C. &sect; 450i.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/89/public/106
- text: Section 406 of the Agricultural Research, Extension, and Education Reform
    Act of 1998 (AREERA) (7 U.S.C. 7626), as reauthorized by Section 7306 of the Food,
    Conservation, and Energy Act of 2008 (FCEA) (Public Law 110-246), authorized the
    Secretary of Agriculture to establish a competitive grants program that provides
    funding for integrated, multifunctional agricultural research, extension, and
    education activities. Subject to the availability of appropriations to carry out
    this program, the Secretary may award grants to colleges and universities [as
    defined by section 1404 of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and
    Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (NARETPA) (7 U.S.C. 3103)], as amended, on a competitive
    basis for projects that address priorities in United States agriculture and involve
    integrated research, education, and extension activities, as determined by the
    Secretary in consultation with the National Agricultural Research, Extension,
    Education, and Economics Advisory Board (NAREEEAB).  Section 7129 of the FCEA
    amended section 406(b) of AREERA (7 U.S.C. 7626(b)), adding Hispanic-serving agricultural
    colleges and universities (HSACUs) as eligible entities for competitive funds
    awarded under this authority (see Part III.B. of RFA for more information).. 7
    U.S.C. &sect; 7626.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/uscode/7/7626
- text: Section 2(c)(1)(B) of Public Law 89–106, as amended.. Pub. L. 89, 106. 7 U.S.C.
    &sect; 7626.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/89/public/106
- text: Title V of the Rural Development Act of 1972. Pub. L. 92, 419. 7 U.S.C. &sect;
    2204a.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/92/public/419
beneficiary_types:
- Federal
- Minority group
- Other private institution/organization
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- State
categories:
- Agricultural - Research and Development
- Science and Technology - Research - Specialized
cfda: '10.303'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=10.303
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: 'GENERAL: NIFA Integrated Programs provide support for integrated research,
  education, and extension activities. Integrated, multi-functional projects are particularly
  effective in addressing important agricultural issues through the conduct of problem-focused
  research that is combined with education and extension of knowledge to those in
  need of solutions. These activities address critical national, regional, and multi-state
  agricultural issues, priorities, or problems. Integrated Programs hold the greatest
  potential to produce and disseminate knowledge and technology directly to end users
  while providing for educational opportunities to assure agricultural expertise in
  future generations. See individual program Requests for Applications for additional
  information about the topics. SEVERAL PROGRAMS ARE FUNDED UNDER CFDA 10.303. SPECIFIC
  OBJECTIVES ARE AS FOLLOWS: (1) Integrated Research, Education, and Extension Competitive
  Grants Program: See RFA for priority areas. (2) Integrated Research, Education,
  and Extension Competitive Grants Program: National Integrated Food Safety Initiative
  The purpose of the National Integrated Food Safety Initiative is to support food
  safety projects that demonstrate an integrated approach to solving problems in applied
  food safety research, education, or extension. Various models for integration of
  applied research, education, and extension will be considered for funding. Applications
  describing multi-state, multi-institutional, multidisciplinary, and multifunctional
  activities (and combinations thereof) are encouraged. Applicants are strongly encouraged
  to address at least two of the three functional areas of research, education, and
  extension (i.e., research and extension, research and education, or extension and
  education). (3) Integrated Research, Education, And Extension Competitive Grants
  Program: \(6) Integrated Research, Education, and Extension Competitive Grants Program:
  Methyl Bromide Transitions Program The goal of the Methyl Bromide Transitions (MBT)
  program is to support the discovery and implementation of practical pest management
  alternatives to methyl bromide uses or minimize methyl bromide emissions for which
  the United States is requesting critical use exemptions. The program is focused
  on integrated commercial or field scale research that targets short- to medium-term
  solutions. (7) Integrated Organic Program The purpose of the Integrated Organic
  Program is to solve critical organic agriculture issues, priorities, or problems
  through the integration of research, education, and extension activities. The Organic
  Transitions Program (ORG) funds the development and implementation of research,
  extension, and higher education programs to improve the competitiveness of organic
  producers and producers who are adopting organic practices. Funding opportunities
  for the ORG Program is included in the same Request for Applications (RFA) as the
  Organic Research and Extension Initiative (OREI). PLEASE NOTE: THIS PROGRAM DOES
  NOT FUND START UP BUSINESSES. (8) Regional Rural Development Centers (RRDCs): The
  RRDCs play a unique role in USDA''s service to rural America. They link the research
  and educational outreach capacity of the nation''s public universities with communities,
  local decision makers, entrepreneurs, families, and farmers and ranchers to help
  address a wide range of development issues. They collaborate on national issues
  that span regions-like e-commerce, the changing interface between rural, suburban,
  and urban places, and workforce quality and jobs creation. Each tailors programs
  to address particular needs in its region.'
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":11400000.0,"usa_spending_actual":11620915.56},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":11672298.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":11581509.99},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":46816003.93}]'
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":6510768.38,"obligation":11476360.75},{"x":"2023","outlay":1606280.56,"obligation":11591963.41},{"x":"2024","outlay":0.0,"obligation":47211267.09}]'
permalink: /program/10.303.html
popular_name: Integrated Programs
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "For Fiscal Year 2016:\r\n(A) Integrated Research, Education, and Extension\
    \ Competitive Grants Program - National Integrated Water Quality Program:\r\n\r\
    \nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\
    \n\r\n(B) National Integrated Food Safety Initiative (aka NIFSI):\r\n\r\nNo Action\
    \ Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n(C\
    \ ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated Pest Management) Centers aka Integrated pest Mgmt./Biological\
    \ Control:\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for\
    \ several years.\r\n\r\n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation:\r\n\r\nNo\
    \ Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n\
    \r\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for Major Food Crop System (aka Risk Avoidance\
    \ and Mitigation Program):\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not\
    \ been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n(F) Integrated Research, Education, and\
    \ Extension Competitive Grants Program-Methyl Bromide Transition\r\n(aka MBT):\r\
    \n\r\nFor FY 2016, approximately $1.8 million was available for awards. Thirteen\
    \ (13) submitted proposals will be peer reviewed and awards will be made by September\
    \ 30, 2016.\r\n\r\nThe funding rate is anticipated to be approximately 30%.\r\n\
    \r\n(G) Integrated Research, Education, and Extension Competitive Grants Program-Organic\
    \ Transitions(aka ORG):\r\n\r\nFor the FY 2016 award cycle, about $3.7 million\
    \ was available for grant awards after deducting legislatively authorized set-asides.\r\
    \n\r\nA total of 47 applications, requesting a total of $22,790,906, were received\
    \ in this year’s competition.  In July 2016, an 8-member peer review virtual panel\
    \ will evaluate these applications. The peer panel includes faculty from land\
    \ grant universities, researchers from USDA Agricultural Research Service and\
    \ a non-profit stakeholder group.\r\n\r\nFunding decisions are not yet made but\
    \ it is anticipated that about 8 new awards will be made in FY 2016 representing\
    \ 17% success rate.\r\n\r\n(H) Regional Rural Development Centers:\r\nNIFA announced\
    \ the availability of grant funds and requests applications for the Regional Rural\
    \ Development Centers (RRDC) Competitive Grants Program for fiscal year (FY) 2016\
    \ to link the research and educational outreach capacity of the nation's public\
    \ universities with communities, local decision makers, entrepreneurs, families,\
    \ and farmers and ranchers to help address a wide range of development issues\
    \ for prosperity for sustainable and secure communities will always be a matter\
    \ of public interest. RRDC’s leverage land-grant resources in pursuit of USDA’s\
    \ rural development mission by bringing together the most innovative minds, from\
    \ inside and outside universities, to address cutting-edge issues without regard\
    \ to state boundaries. They respond to emerging issues, generate credible science-based\
    \ information to clarify these issues, and create public-private partnerships\
    \ to address them.\r\n\r\nThe amount available for support of this program in\
    \ FY 2016 was $950,400 ($237,600 per center). The grant deadline was June 2, 2016.\
    \  Four (4) proposals were reviewed and recommended for funding.\r\n\r\n(I) Rapid\
    \ Responses to Pests & Pathogens (formerly Critical Issues):\r\n\r\nNo Action\
    \ Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n For Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2016:\r\n\r\n(A) Water Quality\r\n (also Conservation Effects Assessment\
    \ Projects (CEAP)\r\naka Integrated - Water Quality\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\
    \nProgram has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n\r\n(B) National Integrated\
    \ Food Safety Initiative (aka NIFSI):\r\n\r\nNo Action Needed (N/A/N):\r\nProgram\
    \ has not been funded for several years.\r\n\r\n\r\n(C ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated\
    \ Pest Management) Centers (aka RIPM)\r\naka Integrated pest Mgmt./Biological\
    \ Control\r\n(aka IPM Centers - - NOT RIPM)\r\n\r\nNOTE: Formerly RIPM - CFDA\
    \ 10.500 and Research - CFDA 10.200 (funded via Smith-Lever 3 (d) and P.L. 89-106)\r\
    \n\r\n\r\n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation\r\n\r\nSPECIAL NOTE: See\
    \ CPPM - CFDA # 10.329\r\n\r\n\r\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for Major Food\
    \ Crop System (aka Risk Avoidance and Mitigation Program?)\r\n\r\nSPECIAL NOTE:\
    \ See CPPM - CFDA # 10.329\r\n\r\n\r\n(F) Methyl Bromide Transition Program (MBT)\r\
    \nIntegrated Research, Education, and Extension Competitive Grants Program-Methyl\
    \ Bromide Transition\r\n\r\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2016:\r\n\r\nFor the FY 2016,\
    \ the National Institute of Food and Agriculture awarded four awards that ranged\
    \ from $418,313 to $499.999 for a total of approximately $1.89 million.\r\n\r\n\
    The funding rate was 31%.\r\n\r\n\r\n(G) Organic Transition-Risk Assessment\r\n\
    aka Organic Transition Program (ORG) FDC \"51106\"\r\n\r\nNOTE: Also see CFDA\
    \ 10.307 OREI - FDC \"51300\"\r\n\r\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2016:\r\n\r\n\r\nFor\
    \ the FY 2016 award cycle, $3,777,222 was available for project grant awards after\
    \ subtracting administrative costs. A total of 47 applications, requesting a total\
    \ of $22,790,906, were received.  In July 2016, a 12-member peer review virtual\
    \ panel evaluated these applications. The peer panel included faculty from land\
    \ grant universities, researchers from USDA Agricultural Research Service and\
    \ a non-profit stakeholder group. Funds were available to support a total of 8\
    \ new awards. The funding ratio for this program in FY16 was 17%. Funded projects\
    \ seek to support the development and implementation of research, extension and\
    \ higher education programs to improve the competitiveness of organic livestock\
    \ and crop producers, as well as those who are adopting organic practices by studying\
    \ and documenting environmental services provided by organic farming systems in\
    \ the area of soil conservation and climate change mitigation, including greenhouse\
    \ gases. Projects were also funded to develop strategies to limit barriers to\
    \ organic transition. \r\nAll projects integrate research, education and extension\
    \ activities.\r\n\r\n\r\n\r\n(H) Regional Rural Development Centers\r\n\r\n\r\n\
    For Fiscal Year (FY) 2016:\r\n\r\nThe amount available for support of this program\
    \ in FY 2016 $950,720 million ($237,680 per center)\r\n\r\nFour proposals were\
    \ submitted and accepted in GAC. \r\n\r\nFour proposals underwent a Noncompetitive\
    \ Merit Review by three reviewers with NIFA. All four were recommended to receive\
    \ funding for “Regional Rural Development Centers” grant. Amounts awarded to the\
    \ four institutions throughout the United States are:\r\nLocation #1    Amount:\
    \  $ 237,680\r\nLocation #2    Amount:  $ 237,680\r\nLocation #3    Amount:  $\
    \ 237,680\r\nLocation #4    Amount:  $ 237,680\r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2017,\
    \ the amount appropriated for this Program was $8,000,000. \n\nThe amount available\
    \ for awards was $7,571,059, after legislatively mandated set-asides.\n\n(F) Methyl\
    \ Bromide Transition Program (MBT)\nIntegrated Research, Education, and Extension\
    \ Competitive Grants Program-Methyl Bromide Transition;\n\nFor FY 2017, The National\
    \ Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) made four (4) awards that ranged from\
    \ $393,049 to $499,998. The total amount awarded was approximately $ 1.8 million.\n\
    \nThe funding rate was 31%.\n\n(G) Organic Transition-Risk Assessment\naka Organic\
    \ Transition Program (ORG); and\n\nNOTE: Also see CFDA 10.307 OREI \n\nFor the\
    \ FY 2017 award cycle, approximately $3.7 million was available for project grant\
    \ awards, after legislatively mandated set-asides. \n\nA total of 44 applications,\
    \ requesting a total of $20,832,046 were received.  \n\nIn June 2017, a 12-member\
    \ (plus two ad hoc) peer review virtual panel evaluated these applications. \n\
    \nThe peer panel included faculty from land grant universities, researchers from\
    \ USDA Agricultural Research Service and a non-profit stakeholder group. Funds\
    \ were available to support a total of 8 new awards. \n\nThe funding ratio for\
    \ this program in FY17 was 18%. \n\nFunded projects seek to support the development\
    \ and implementation of research, extension and higher education programs to improve\
    \ the competitiveness of organic livestock and crop producers, as well as those\
    \ who are adopting organic practices by studying and documenting environmental\
    \ services provided by organic farming systems in the area of soil conservation\
    \ and climate change mitigation, including greenhouse gases. \n\nProjects were\
    \ also funded to develop cultural practices and other allowable alternatives to\
    \ substances recommended for removal from the National Organic Program’s National\
    \ List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances. \n\nAll projects integrate research,\
    \ education and/or extension activities.\n\n(H) Regional Rural Development Centers;\n\
    \nThe amount available for support of this program in FY 2017 was $1,899,520 ($474,880\
    \ per Center). \n\nFour (4) proposals were submitted, reviewed and accepted. \n\
    \nFour (4) proposals underwent a Noncompetitive Merit Review by three (3) reviewers\
    \ with NIFA. All four (4) were recommended to receive funding for “Regional Rural\
    \ Development Centers” grant. Amounts awarded to the four (4) institutions throughout\
    \ the United States are:\n\nLocation #1    Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation #2   \
    \ Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation #3    Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation #4    Amount:\
    \  $ 474,880\n\nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently\
    \ funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:\
    \  \n\n(A) Water Quality\n(also Conservation Effects Assessment Projects (CEAP)\n\
    aka Integrated - Water Quality;\n\n(B) National Integrated Food Safety Initiative\
    \ (aka NIFSI);\n\n(C ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated Pest Management) Centers; \n\
    \n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation; and\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: See CPPM -\
    \ CFDA # 10.329\n\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for Major Food Crop System\
    \ (aka Risk Avoidance and Mitigation Program);\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: See CPPM - CFDA\
    \ # 10.329."
  year: '2017'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\nThe total amount available\
    \ for Fiscal Year 2018 Integrated Activities awards was $8,491,947.\n\n(F) Methyl\
    \ Bromide Transition Program (MBT)\nIntegrated Research, Education, and Extension\
    \ Competitive Grants Program-Methyl Bromide Transition;\n\nFor FY 2018, The National\
    \ Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) made four (4) awards that ranged from\
    \ $375,895 to $499,979. The total amount awarded was approximately $ 1.8 million.\n\
    \nThe funding rate was 33%.\n\n(G) Organic Transition-Risk Assessment\naka Organic\
    \ Transition Program (ORG): \n\nNOTE: Also see CFDA 10.307 OREI \n\nFor the FY\
    \ 2018 award cycle, about $4,748,800 was available for project grant awards after\
    \ subtracting administrative costs. A total of 53 applications, requesting a total\
    \ of $25,580,776.00 were received.  In July 2018, a 14-member peer review virtual\
    \ panel evaluated these applications. The peer panel included faculty from land\
    \ grant universities, researchers from USDA Agricultural Research Service and\
    \ a non-profit stakeholder group. Funds were available to support a total of 10\
    \ new awards. The funding ratio for this program in FY18 was 19%. Funded projects\
    \ seek to support the development and implementation of research, extension and\
    \ higher education programs to improve the competitiveness of organic livestock\
    \ and crop producers, as well as those who are adopting organic practices by studying\
    \ and documenting environmental services provided by organic farming systems in\
    \ the area of soil conservation and climate change mitigation, including greenhouse\
    \ gases. Projects were also funded to develop cultural practices and other allowable\
    \ alternatives to substances recommended for removal from the National Organic\
    \ Program’s National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances. \nAll projects\
    \ integrate research, education and/or extension activities\n\n(H) Regional Rural\
    \ Development Centers;\n\nThe amount available for support of this program in\
    \ FY 2018 $1,899,520 ($474,880 per Center). \n\nFour proposals were submitted,\
    \ accepted and reviewed. \n\nFour proposals underwent a Noncompetitive Merit Review\
    \ by three reviewers with NIFA. All four were recommended to receive funding for\
    \ “Regional Rural Development Centers” grant. Amounts awarded to the four institutions\
    \ throughout the United States are:\n\nLocation #1    Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation\
    \ #2    Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation #3    Amount:  $ 474,880\nLocation #4   \
    \ Amount:  $ 474,880\n\nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been\
    \ recently funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following\
    \ Programs:  \n\n(A) Water Quality\n(also Conservation Effects Assessment Projects\
    \ (CEAP)\naka Integrated - Water Quality;\n\n(B) National Integrated Food Safety\
    \ Initiative (aka NIFSI);\n\n(C ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated Pest Management)\
    \ Centers; \n\n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation; and\n\nSPECIAL NOTE:\
    \ See CPPM - CFDA # 10.329\n\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for Major Food\
    \ Crop System (aka Risk Avoidance and Mitigation Program);\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: See\
    \ CPPM - CFDA # 10.329."
  year: '2018'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\nThe total amount available\
    \ for Fiscal Year 2019 Integrated Activities awards was $9,489,271.\n\n(F) Methyl\
    \ Bromide Transition Program (MBT)\nIntegrated Research, Education, and Extension\
    \ Competitive Grants Program-Methyl Bromide Transition;\n\nFor FY 2019, the National\
    \ Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) will support five (5) grants, totaling\
    \ approximately $1.8 million for research to help the discovery and implementation\
    \ of practical pest management alternatives for commodities and uses affected\
    \ by methyl bromide phase out. NIFA selected the projects based upon 14 proposals\
    \ submitted. \n\nThe funding rate was 35%.\n\n(G) Organic Transition-Risk Assessment\n\
    aka Organic Transition Program (ORG): \n\nNOTE: Also see CFDA 10.307 OREI \n\n\
    For the FY 2019 award cycle, about $5,698,560 was available for project grant\
    \ awards after subtracting administrative costs. A total of 24 applications, requesting\
    \ a total of $11,499,813.00 were received.  In July 2019, a 13-member peer review\
    \ virtual panel evaluated these applications. The peer panel included faculty\
    \ from land grant universities, researchers from USDA Agricultural Research Service\
    \ and a non-profit stakeholder group. Funds were available to support a total\
    \ of 11 new awards. The funding ratio for this program in FY19 was 46%. Funded\
    \ projects seek to support the development and implementation of research, extension\
    \ and higher education programs to improve the competitiveness of organic livestock\
    \ and crop producers, as well as those who are adopting organic practices by studying\
    \ and documenting environmental services provided by organic farming systems in\
    \ the area of soil conservation and climate change mitigation, including greenhouse\
    \ gases. Projects were also funded to develop cultural practices and other allowable\
    \ alternatives to substances recommended for removal from the National Organic\
    \ Program’s National List of Allowed and Prohibited Substances. \nAll projects\
    \ integrate research, education and/or extension activities\n\n(H) Regional Rural\
    \ Development Centers:\n\nNIFA announced the availability of grant funds and requests\
    \ applications for the Regional Rural Development Centers (RRDC) Competitive Grants\
    \ Program for fiscal year (FY) 2019 to link the research and educational outreach\
    \ capacity of the nation's public universities with communities, local decision\
    \ makers, entrepreneurs, families, and farmers and ranchers to help address a\
    \ wide range of development issues for prosperity for sustainable and secure communities\
    \ will always be a matter of public interest. RRDC’s leverage land-grant resources\
    \ in pursuit of USDA’s rural development mission by bringing together the most\
    \ innovative minds—from inside and outside universities—to address cutting-edge\
    \ issues without regard to state boundaries. They respond to emerging issues,\
    \ generate credible science-based information to clarify these issues, and create\
    \ public-private partnerships to address them. \n\nThe amount available for support\
    \ of this program in FY 2019 is $1,899,520 ($474,880 per center). Four proposals\
    \ were reviewed and recommended for funding. \n\nThe listing below represents\
    \ Programs which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required\
    \ (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\n(A) Water Quality\n(also Conservation\
    \ Effects Assessment Projects (CEAP)\naka Integrated - Water Quality;\n\n(B) National\
    \ Integrated Food Safety Initiative (aka NIFSI);\n\n(C ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated\
    \ Pest Management) Centers; \n\n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation; and\n\
    \nSPECIAL NOTE: See CPPM - CFDA # 10.329\n\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for\
    \ Major Food Crop System (aka Risk Avoidance and Mitigation Program);\n\nSPECIAL\
    \ NOTE: See CPPM - CFDA # 10.329."
  year: '2019'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\nThe projected amount\
    \ available for Fiscal Year 2020 Integrated Activities awards is $1,611,743.\n\
    \n(F) Methyl Bromide Transition Program (MBT)\nIntegrated Research, Education,\
    \ and Extension Competitive Grants Program-Methyl Bromide Transition;\n\nIf funding\
    \ is available for this program in FY 2020, NIFA anticipates supporting similar\
    \ projects at a similar level of funding. Pertinent information to be provided\
    \ by Program at a future date.\n\n(G) Organic Transition-Risk Assessment\naka\
    \ Organic Transition Program (ORG):\n\nNOTE: Also see CFDA 10.307 OREI \n\nThe\
    \ FY 2020 RFA will focus on the development and implementation of research, extension\
    \ and higher education programs to improve the competitiveness of organic livestock\
    \ and crop producers, as well as those who are adopting organic practices. The\
    \ program will focus on the development and implementation of biologically based\
    \ pest management practices that mitigate the ecological, agronomic and economic\
    \ risks associated with a transition from conventional to organic agricultural\
    \ production systems. The anticipated total amount (pending approval) for the\
    \ program will be $6 million.\n\nPertinent information will be provided by Program\
    \ at a future date.\n\n(H) Regional Rural Development Centers;\n\nWe anticipated\
    \ the same level of funding for FY 2020 and similar projects will be awarded.\
    \ \n\n\nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently funded.\
    \ Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\
    \n(A) Water Quality\n(also Conservation Effects Assessment Projects (CEAP)\naka\
    \ Integrated - Water Quality;\n\n(B) National Integrated Food Safety Initiative\
    \ (aka NIFSI);\n\n(C ) (Regional) IPM (Integrated Pest Management) Centers; \n\
    \n(D) Crops at Risk from FQPA Implementation; and\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: See CPPM -\
    \ CFDA # 10.329\n\n(E) FQPA Risk Mitigation Program for Major Food Crop System\
    \ (aka Risk Avoidance and Mitigation Program);\n\nSPECIAL NOTE: See CPPM - CFDA\
    \ # 10.329."
  year: '2020'
- description: Pertinent information to be provided by Program at a future date.
  year: '2023'
rules_regulations: "As an administrator of U.S. government support, NIFA works in\
  \ partnership with grantees to ensure responsible stewardship of federal funds.\
  \ Our grantees and partners are required to comply with all relevant rules and regulations.\
  \ The following resources are provided to NIFA’s partners and award recipients to\
  \ support their adherence to federal regulations governing program performance:\r\
  \n\r\nNIFA’s primary (main) website:\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/regulations-and-guidelines\r\
  \n\r\nThe following represent specific documents and direct links:\r\n\r\nPOLICY\
  \ GUIDE\r\nNIFA’s Federal Assistance Policy Guide describes agency policies and\
  \ procedures.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/policy-guide\r\n\r\nCERTIFICATIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS\r\
  \nCertifications and representations provided through the NIFA application process.\r\
  \nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/certifications-and-representations\r\n\r\n\r\nACKNOWLEDGEMENT\
  \ OF USDA SUPPORT BY NIFA\r\nWhen acknowledging USDA support in accordance with\
  \ 2 CFR Part 415, grantees must use the following acknowledgement for all projects\
  \ or initiatives supported by NIFA.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/acknowledgment-usda-support-nifa\r\
  \n\r\nFEDERAL REGULATIONS\r\nThe Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) lists all regulations\
  \ published in the Federal Register.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/federal-regulations\r\
  \n\r\nFOIA\r\nThe Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) provides that any person has\
  \ the right to request access to federal documents and information such as research\
  \ data.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/foia\r\n\r\nNEPA POLICY AND GUIDANCE\r\nThe National\
  \ Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) Policy and Guidance set the standard for identifying\
  \ potential environmental impacts.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/nepa-policy-and-guidance\r\
  \n\r\nOGFM ISSUED CORRESPONDENCE\r\nThe Office of Grants and Financial Management\
  \ occasionally issues correspondence to applicants, grantees, and/or the general\
  \ public for informational or clarification purposes.\r\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/ogfm-issued-correspondence\r\
  \n\r\nRESEARCH MISCONDUCT\r\nNIFA requires that all its awardees adhere to the USDA\
  \ Scientific Integrity Policy and the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct.\r\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/research-misconduct \r\n\r\nNIFA’S GENERAL AWARD TERMS AND\
  \ CONDITIONS\r\n\r\nAward terms and conditions are determined by statutory, regulatory,\
  \ and agency requirements, as well as each grant’s circumstances. Terms and conditions\
  \ dictate important items related to your grant, including method of payment, reporting\
  \ frequency and content, and prior approval requirements.\r\n\r\nReferences to the\
  \ terms and conditions of awards are located on the NIFA 2009 Award Fact Sheet.\
  \ NIFA's general award terms and conditions (see link below) is applicable to this\
  \ program, for awards with an award date on December 26, 2014 and thereafter.\r\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/resource/nifa-general-terms-and-conditions-grants-and-cooperative-agreements-october-2016.\r\
  \n\r\n"
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/c4066ca205db43f78f4dfdf7d9681382/view
sub-agency: National Institute of Food and Agriculture
tax_expenditures: null
title: Integrated Programs
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=2282d0ca5bcafc4961a54982d80eaf8a
---
