---
agency: Department of Agriculture
applicant_types:
- Anyone/general public
- Federal
- Minority group
- Other private institutions/organizations
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: 7 U.S.C. &sect; 341-349.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/uscode/7/341
beneficiary_types:
- Anyone/general public
- Federal
- Minority group
- Other private institution/organization
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- State
- U.S. Territories
categories:
- Agricultural - Marketing
- Agricultural - Technical Assistance, Information and Services
- Community Development - Recreation
- Community Development - Rural Community Development
- Community Development - Technical Assistance and Services
- Consumer Protection - Information and Educational Services
- Education - Health Education and Training
- Education - Higher Education - General
- Energy - Conservation
- Environmental Quality - Research, Education, Training
- Food and Nutrition - Research
- Health - Libraries, Information and Education Services
- Health - Maternity, Infants, Children
- Income Security and Social Services - Youth Services
- Information and Statistics - General
- Information and Statistics - Libraries, Clearinghouses, Archives
cfda: '10.500'
fiscal_year: '2024'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=10.500
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: 'The Cooperative Extension Service (CES) has an important role in reducing
  the impact of disasters through extension education. The Extension Special Needs
  program sponsors targeted projects that enable CES to assist in preparing for, providing
  an educational response to, and recovering from disasters. Education programming
  funded by this program will help communities, families and individuals become more
  self-sustaining by strengthening and increasing their resiliency to disaster. Some
  types of hazards and disaster related events funded in previous years include uncertainties
  caused by losses of economic infrastructure, severe weather or other natural disasters,
  security breaches, human disease, or high consequence animal diseases and plant
  pests. There has been an increase in public awareness regarding the number and severity
  of disaster type critical incidents involving earthquakes, tsunamis, tornadoes,
  wildfire, drought, contagious disease, and terrorist events. The National Academy
  of Sciences Committee on Environment and Natural Resources and the Subcommittee
  on Disaster Reduction of the National Science and Technology Council have acknowledged
  the many effective roles that the Cooperative Extension System (CES) has played
  in disaster preparedness, response and remediation. Within the states and territories,
  the CES has repeatedly served as the trusted community organization that has helped
  to enable families, communities, and businesses to successfully prepare for, respond
  to and cope with disaster losses and critical incidents. Once a disaster has occurred,
  the local extension outreach includes: 1) Communicating practical science-based
  risk information, 2) Developing relevant educational experiences and programs, 3)
  Working with individuals and communities to open new communication channels, and
  4) Mitigating losses and facilitating recovery. Never was this more evident than
  after hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma in 2005 and during the 2008 Midwestern
  Summer flooding. During and after these incidents, local Extension agents served
  as a critical communication node throughout affected urban and rural areas, particularly
  when traditional communication systems were temporarily overwhelmed or destroyed.
  The Extension Special Needs RFA encourages proposals that specifically address one
  or more of the following six key target areas: 1. Education and Technical assistance
  through inter-disciplinary and multi-state disaster training programs and demonstration
  projects for problem solving, especially those which build upon already existing
  strengths, contribute to or expand the EDEN and/or eXtension educational materials
  related to disaster preparation, mitigation, response and recovery; 2. Collaboration
  with Federal, state and local agencies and other disaster relief organizations to
  support education and service activities that enhance recovery of impacted rural
  communities, schools, businesses and agricultural-based activities; 3. Long range
  family, community and regional planning projects that will enhance implementation
  of programs that serve public needs in preparation for, during and after emergency
  situations within impacted States and across impacted regions; 4. Communication
  delivery of key information that meets end-users’ needs in a timely fashion with
  consideration of potentially limited communication channels due to disaster situations;
  5. Dissemination of credible, science-based information that is reliable and easily
  accessible even if electronic access is compromised; and 6. Integrated Research
  and Extension Planning Projects (up to $15,000) are intended to provide assistance
  to applicants in bringing together teams for the development of highly competitive
  grant proposals where extension personnel would apply for large grants (in excess
  of $250,000) from other grant programs and lead nationally important disaster prevention,
  protection and mitigation projects. Fundable projects should support education and
  extension activities which: 1. Reduce risk through planning, disaster preparedness
  and emergency response by improving communication between the public, community
  leaders, state and Federal agencies; 2. Develop strategies and educational materials
  and/or programming in the area of emergency planning, infrastructure design and
  disaster recovery operation; 3. Develop community networks that provide real-time
  disaster education information;'
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":15557000.0,"usa_spending_actual":81749029.76},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":15557000.0,"usa_spending_actual":52868812.5},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":15557000.0,"usa_spending_actual":48569.96}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":12547035.92,"obligation":67287469.82},{"x":"2024","outlay":1176993.21,"obligation":6062493.3},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":50000.0}]'
permalink: /program/10.500.html
popular_name: CES
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2017,\
    \ the amount available for awards was $455,489,177, after legislatively mandated\
    \ set-asides.\n\n(A), (B) and (CC) -  Cooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-grant\
    \ Institutions (LGIs) and  District of Columbia Public Postsecondary Education\
    \ Reorganization Act Program (aka DCPPERA) \n\n(A) Cooperative Extension Programs\
    \ at 1862 Land-grant Institutions \n\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, approximately\
    \ $300 million was appropriated for the Smith-Lever 3(b) & (c) Programs.\n\nPer\
    \ the Budget Office, $289,045,417 was available for awards for this Program.\n\
    \nCooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-Grant Institutions were allocated\
    \ funds to support Extension activities. \n\nAwards ranged from $1,133,542 to\
    \ $13,255,226.\n\n(B) Cooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-grant Institutions\
    \ (Smith-Lever Special Needs) \n\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2017:\n\nSpecial Needs program\
    \ was allocated $1,029,979 to support individual projects that may be initiated\
    \ under this program.  \n\nAwards ranged from $11,347 to 111,504.\n\n(CC) University\
    \ of the District of Columbia Public Postsecondary Education Reorganization Act\
    \ Program (DCPPERA)\n\nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2017, $1,204,360 (representing the\
    \ Appropriation, less the legislatively mandated set-asides), was available to\
    \ fund this program allocated solely to the University of the District of Columbia\
    \ (UDC).  \n\nThere is no matching requirement for this program.  \n\nAdministrative\
    \ costs are taken from Smith-Lever funds. \n\n(C ) Smith-Lever Special Needs Competitive\
    \ Grants Program [Section 3 (b) & (c )]\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nThe National\
    \ Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) funded Smith Lever Special Needs projects\
    \ to implement applied scientific programs that serve public needs in preparation\
    \ for, during and after local or regional emergency situations or disasters. \
    \ \n\nThe program received eight (8) applications and awarded six (6) projects,\
    \ totaling $461,619.\n\n(D) Agricultural Extension at 1890 Land-Grant Institutions,\
    \ Including Tuskegee University, West Virginia State University,  and Central\
    \ State University –   (aka 1890 LGIs)\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nApproximately\
    \ $45.5 million was appropriated for this program to support the Extension programs\
    \ at the 19 1890 Land-Grant Universities, in 18 states.  After legislatively authorized\
    \ set-asides, approximately $43.7 million was available for awards.\n\nFunds are\
    \ distributed on a formula basis.  This program requires a dollar for dollar match.\
    \  However, NIFA may consider and approve matching waiver requests above the 50\
    \ percent level.   \n\n(E) & (EE) - Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program\
    \ (aka EFNEP)  [Smith-Lever - Section 3 (d)] and EFNEP WebNEERS (Competitive)\n\
    \nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2017:\n\nThe Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program\
    \ (EFNEP) brings together federal, state, and local resources to target two (2)\
    \ primary audiences: low-income families with young children and low-income youth.\
    \  The program is delivered by the 1862 and the 1890 Land-Grant Institutions.\
    \  Since 1969, EFNEP has reached more than 33 million low-incomes families and\
    \ youth, improving their diets and food-related behaviors.  Each year EFNEP enrolls\
    \ nearly half a million new program participants.  \n\nIn FY 2017, EFNEP received\
    \ $67,417,320 in federal funding.  EFNEP reached 108,216 adults and 366,327 youth\
    \ directly; and more than 300,000 family members indirectly (source: EFNEP’s evaluation\
    \ and reporting system, WebNEERS; see https://nifa.usda.gov/sites/default/files/resource/EFNEP-2017-Annual-Report.pdf).\
    \  82% of EFNEP participants who reported income were at or below 100% of poverty,\
    \ earning $24,600 a year or less for a family of four (4).  At least 71% of all\
    \ EFNEP adults identify as minorities.  This is significant because poor health\
    \ disproportionately affects minority and low-income populations.  \n\nEFNEP consistently\
    \ demonstrates strong results.  FY 2017 data confirms adult graduates:  \n•\t\
    Improve their diets:  94% report more closely following dietary recommendations,\
    \ including consuming an extra 1/2  cup of fruits and vegetables \n•\tImprove\
    \ their nutrition practices:  89% improve nutrition practices, such as making\
    \ healthier food choices and reading nutrition labels \n•\tStretch their food\
    \ dollars farther:  84% improve food resource management practices, such as planning\
    \ meals and shopping with a grocery list \n•\tHandle food more safely:  65% improve\
    \ food safety practices, such as storing and thawing food properly \n•\tIncrease\
    \ their physical activity rates:  40% increase their physical activity level by\
    \ 30 minutes or more\n\n(G), (H) & (W) – Farm Safety, Youth Farm Safety Education\
    \ and Certification, and Assistive Technology Program for Farmers with Disabilities\
    \ (AgrAbility Project) \n\nNOTE: Programs were combined in FY 2012.\n\nIn Fiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2012 Congress consolidated Extension 3(d) line items Farm Safety (AgrAbility)\
    \ and Youth Farm Safety Education and Certification into a single line item.\n\
    \nIn FY 2017, after legislatively mandated set asides, approximately $4,423,770\
    \ was available to support Farm Safety (i.e., AgrAbility) and Youth Farm Safety\
    \ Education and Certification (YFSEC) programs. \n\nOf the above amount, $4,123,770\
    \ was made available to support AgrAbility projects: 17 continuation awards, all\
    \ State/Regional AgrAbility Projects (SRAPs); one (1) continuation National AgrAbility\
    \ Project (NAP); and three (3) new SRAPs. \n\nAll AgrAbility projects are partnerships\
    \ between Cooperative Extension at 1862 and 1890 Land-Grant Colleges and Universities\
    \ and private non-profit organizations that provide direct service to individuals\
    \ with disabilities. SRAPs and NAP focus on increasing the likelihood that individuals\
    \ with disabilities and their families engaged in production agriculture (AgrAbility’s\
    \ customers) will become more successful. \n\nNIFA received ten (10) new SRAP\
    \ proposals in FY 2017 and competitively funded three (3). Funding ratio was 30%.\
    \  \n\nIn FY 2017, NIFA had $300,000 available for YFSEC projects. Applications\
    \ were solicited for three (3) different types of projects:   \n(1)\tSafety in\
    \ Agriculture for Youth (SAY) National Clearinghouse Project – to continue efforts\
    \ made to date with SAY Clearinghouse, curricula submission and review, marketing\
    \ of the Clearinghouse, and SAY National Steering Committee. \n(2)\tYFSEC Instructor\
    \ Training Project – to support recruitment and training of youth farm safety\
    \ instructors in currently available youth farm safety curricula.      \n(3)\t\
    YFSEC Youth Training Project – to continue with development of new/enhancement\
    \ of current youth farm safety curricula, implementation/piloting of those curricula\
    \ with youth, and evaluation of youth training. \n\nNIFA received six (6) YFSEC\
    \ proposals and competitively awarded funding to three (3). Funding ratio was\
    \ 50%. Each of the projects was approved funding for four (4) years, at $100,000\
    \ per year. \n\n(I) New Technologies at Ag Extension (aka NTAE)\n\nIn Fiscal Year\
    \ (FY) 2017, NIFA awarded a continuation grant in the amount of $1,488,000 to\
    \ the New Technologies for Ag Extension (NTAE) program, and eXtension continued\
    \ to work from its FY 2015-2018 strategic plan which charged eXtension to apply\
    \ its technology expertise and broad national network to become a major catalyst\
    \ for increasing innovation and the impact of Cooperative Extension Service (CES)\
    \ professionals’ work throughout the entire CES.\n\n(J), (U) & (V) - Children,\
    \ Youth, and Families At- Risk \n(aka CYFAR), Sustainable Community Projects (aka\
    \ CYFAR-SCP) and Professional Development and Technical Assistance (aka CYFAR-PDTA)\n\
    \nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2017:\n\nTotal CYFAR funding was $8,054,025. Sustainable Community\
    \ Project funding represented 45 successful applicants (new and continued awards)\
    \ and successful applicants will receive $7,040,000 for Fiscal Year 2017.  \n\n\
    The funding ratio for new projects was 10%.\n\nThe CYFAR Professional and Development\
    \ and Technical Assistance (PDTA) funding was $563,340.\n\nThe CYFAR Military\
    \ PDTA funding was $450,000.\n\n(L) Federally-Recognized Tribes Extension Program\
    \  \n(aka FRTEP)\n\nIn Fiscal Year 2017, the FRTEP program began a new four-year\
    \ continuation. NIFA awarded $2,912,490 to 36 extension offices through its 1862\
    \ Land Grant Universities. Awards will range from $68,580 to $123,000. $35,000\
    \ from the $123,000 award was used to support all 36 Extension offices along with\
    \ attendance at the 2017 Extension Professional Development conference in Polson,\
    \ Montana.\n\n(M) & (BB) - Extension Services at the 1994 Institutions Program\
    \ (aka Tribal Colleges Extension Program and TCEP)  and Tribal Colleges Extension\
    \ - Special Emphasis (aka TCEP-SE)\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nThe program awarded\
    \ $ 4,262,160 to states to support informal community education at the 1994 Land\
    \ Grant institutions. As in 2016, roughly $3.2 million was funded in capacity\
    \ to support Extension offices at 32 institutions. In addition, $1.1 million went\
    \ to 14 special emphasis awards, given to 13 institutions. One school received\
    \ two special emphasis projects. As in 2016, two schools decided not to participate\
    \ in the program in 2017. \n\nTribal Colleges Extension (TCEP) funds community\
    \ based, informal learning on rural reservations. Programs mainly involve youth\
    \ development and may also include the promotion of rural entrepreneurship, healthy\
    \ lifestyles and production agriculture. Every other year eligible institutions\
    \ can complete for Tribal Colleges Extension - Special Emphasis (TCEP-SE) which\
    \ funds pilot projects for informal, community focused learning. \n\nIn  FY 2017,\
    \ both TECP capacity and special emphasis were in a continuation cycle. Capacity\
    \ grants were in their fourth year of a four year cycle. \n\n(N) & (O) -  Renewable\
    \ Resources Extension Act Program – \n(aka RREA) and - National Focus Fund (Competitive)\
    \ Projects (aka RREA-NFF)\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nCapacity program impacts\
    \ resulted in:\n•\tNumber of educational events – 5,888\n•\tNumber of landowners\
    \ adopting at least one new management practice – 321,028\n•\tNumber of forest\
    \ and rangeland acres impacted – 36,350,661\n•\tNumber of management plans developed\
    \ – 2,088\n•\tNumber of forest, range, fish and wildlife income-generating businesses\
    \ created or expanded –2,431\n•\tNumber of new jobs created – 379\n\n(P) Rural\
    \ Health and Safety (aka Rural Health & Safety Education)\n\nFiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2017:\n\nThe total amount available for awards was $2,877,637.\n18 proposals\
    \ received\n9 proposals funded \nRepresents 50 percent acceptance rate\n\n(Q)\
    \ 1890 Facilities Grant Program (aka Section 1447 Grants)\n\nFiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2017:\n\nThe appropriated amount was $19,730,000.  The amount available to support\
    \ 19 facilities projects (one per 1890 land-grant university) was $18,940,800.\
    \  \n\nFunding levels ranged from $701,302 to $1,510,956.\n\n(R) Food Animal Residue\
    \ Avoidance Database Program \n(aka FARAD) \n\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 award\
    \ cycle, Congress appropriated $1,200,000 to support FARAD, which was funded under\
    \ its own line item authority.\n\nFour (4) applications were received and evaluated\
    \ under competition waiver administrative processes.  FARAD applications were\
    \ merit reviewed internally by National Program Staff and all four (4) entities\
    \ were funded.   \n\nThis 31-year-old high performing integrated consortium of\
    \ collaborating institutions currently includes at each Land Grant campus a lead\
    \ Project Director (PD), and his/her respective scientific staff.  \n\t\nThe funding\
    \ ratio for this program in FY 2017 was 100% due to the competition waiver process.\n\
    \nFARAD is a university-based national program that serves as the nation’s primary\
    \ source for scientifically-based recommendations regarding safe withdrawal intervals\
    \ of drugs (used off label) and chemicals in food-producing animals. As such,\
    \ FARAD is a key resource for protection of our nation's food supply, including\
    \ meat, milk and eggs, against accidental contamination of animal-derived foods\
    \ with residues of drugs, pesticides or other agents that could compromise food\
    \ safety.\n\n(T) Agriculture Risk Management Education Program \n(aka RME Program);\n\
    \nNOTE: Mandatory program delegated to another USDA agency (Risk Management Agency)\
    \ but administered by NIFA. \n\nThe amount available for support of this last\
    \ year continuation grant in Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 was: $4,468,800. \n\nFive (5)\
    \ proposals were submitted, accepted and underwent a Noncompetitive Review NIFA\
    \ National Program Leader. All five (5) were recommended to receive funding for\
    \ “Agriculture Risk Management Education” grant. \n\nThe following amounts were\
    \ awarded to the five (5) institutions throughout the United States are:\n•\t\
    North Central RME Center:  $ 1,087,536\n•\tDigital Center for RME:  $ 360,768\n\
    •\tWestern RME Center:  $ 1,087,536\n•\tNortheastern Center for RME:  $ 850,224\n\
    •\tSouthern RME Center:  $ 1,082,736\n\n(DD) Healthy Homes Partnership\n\nFiscal\
    \ Year (FY) 2017:\n\nOne (1) award for $225,000 was provided to a Coordinating\
    \ Institution that administered sub awards to 10 state level participating land-grant\
    \ universities.  The purpose of the Healthy Homes Partnership is to link the resources\
    \ of the USDA National Institute of Food & Agriculture Land Grant Universities\
    \ with the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Lead Hazard\
    \ Control and Healthy Homes for a public outreach program that reduces housing\
    \ deficiencies and risks associated with childhood diseases and injuries. The\
    \ project reduced hazards in the home related to air quality (carbon monoxide,\
    \ radon, and mold), drinking water, pests, and pesticides to improve families’\
    \ health resulting in decrease in asthma & allergies and improved home safety.\
    \  \n\n(GG) Agriculture in the Classroom\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nNIFA provided\
    \ $529,920 to support Agriculture in the Classroom (AITC). AITC programs were\
    \ implemented by state-operated programs to improve agricultural literacy, awareness,\
    \ knowledge, and appreciation among pre-K through 12th-grade teachers and their\
    \ students. \n\nIn FY 2017, AITC’s curriculum website had over 111,000 visitors\
    \ who accessed 397 standards-based lesson plans and 722 companion resources. \n\
    \nOver 1 million teachers and 7 million students were reached through direct contact\
    \ through AITC staff and volunteers in FY 2017. \n\n(HH) Air Force Personal Financial\
    \ Readiness Program Evaluation Development\n\nFiscal Year (FY) 2017:\n\nProgram\
    \ not established until Fiscal Year (FY) 2018. \n\n(II)  Substance Abuse Program\
    \ at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas\n\nThe actual funding for Fiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2017 was $383,254. \n\n(JJ) Food and Agriculture Service Learning Program\n\n\
    In Fiscal Year (FY) 2017 the Teaching Awards (TA) program had $100,000 available\
    \ to support grants. \n\nThere was no competition in FY 2017.  The grantee was\
    \ awarded a no-cost extension.\n\nThe listing below represents Programs which\
    \ have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N)\
    \ for the following Programs:  \n\n(F) Pest Management;\n\nNOTE: \nProgram was\
    \ subsequently, consolidated under CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management\
    \ (CPPM).\n\n(K) Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education - Professional\
    \ Development (aka SARE-PD) \n\nNOTE: SARE Chapters 1 & 3 were combined in FY\
    \ 2014. \nSee CFDA # 10.215. \n\n(S) Grants to Youth Serving Institutions \n(aka\
    \ Rural Youth Development Grants Program and RYD);\n\n(X) Extension IPM Coordination\
    \ and Support Program (IPM-CS);\n\nProgram was subsequently, consolidated under\
    \ CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(Y) Extension\
    \ Outreach on the Marketplace Exchanges of the Affordable Care Act;\n\n(AA) Second\
    \ Language & Culture Exposure for Children Project (aka SLCECY); and\n\n(FF) 4-H\
    \ Military Partnership Professional Development and Technical Assistance Program\
    \ (4HMP-PDTA)."
  year: '2017'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(A), (B) and (CC) - \
    \ Cooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-grant Institutions (aka CES Smith-Lever\
    \ Regular and CES Smith-Lever Special Needs), and  District of Columbia Public\
    \ Postsecondary Education Reorganization Act Program (aka DCPPERA) [Section 3\
    \ (b) & (c )] -  (Capacity previously known as Formula) \n\n(A) Cooperative Extension\
    \ Programs at 1862 Land-grant Institutions (Regular)\n\nCooperative Extension\
    \ Programs at 1862 Land-Grant Institutions and University of the District of Columbia\
    \ Public Postsecondary Education Reorganization Act Program were allocated $288,538,091\
    \ to support Extension activities. Awards ranged from $1,137,893 to $13,313,464.\
    \ The total amount of required matching funds in FY 2018 was $282,147,013.  1862\
    \ Land-Grant Institutions in the 50 States must match 100 percent of the Smith-Lever\
    \ Special Needs (SLSN) funds they receive with funds from non-Federal sources\
    \ such as State or county appropriations. There was no matching requirement for\
    \ the University of the District of Columbia.\n\n(B) Cooperative Extension Programs\
    \ at 1862 Land-Grant Institutions (Smith-Lever Special Needs) \n(Capacity Grant\
    \ Program)\n\nSpecial Needs program was allocated $1,029,979 to support individual\
    \ projects that may be initiated under this program.  \n\nAwards ranged from $11,347\
    \ to $111,504.\n\n(C ) Smith-Lever Special Needs Competitive Grants Program \n\
    [Section 3 (b) & (c )]\n\nThe National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA)\
    \ funded Smith Lever Special Needs projects to implement applied scientific programs\
    \ that serve public needs in preparation for, during and after local or regional\
    \ emergency situations or disasters.  \n\nThe program received 11 applications\
    \ and awarded six projects, totaling $461,844\n\n(CC) - University of the District\
    \ of Columbia Public Postsecondary Education Reorganization Act Program (DCPPERA)\n\
    \nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, $1,212,160 (representing the Appropriation, less the\
    \ legislatively mandated set-asides), was available to fund this program allocated\
    \ solely to the University of the District of Columbia (UDC).  \n\nThere is no\
    \ matching requirement for this program.  \n\nAdministrative costs are taken from\
    \ Smith-Lever funds.\n\n(D) Agricultural Extension at 1890 Land-Grant Institutions,\
    \ Including Tuskegee University, West Virginia State University,  and Central\
    \ State University –   (aka 1890 LGIs and Section 1444) -(Capacity, previously\
    \ known as Formula)\n\nFor Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, $45,620,000 was appropriated\
    \ for this program to support the Extension programs at the 1890 Land-Grant Universities,\
    \ 19 in 18 states.  \n\nThe amount available for awards, after the legislatively\
    \ authorized/mandated set-asides was $43,795,200.\n\nFunds are distributed on\
    \ a formula basis.  This program requires a dollar for dollar match.  However,\
    \ NIFA may consider and approve matching waiver requests above the 50 percent\
    \ level.   \n\nNIFA approved 7 matching waiver requests for program supported\
    \ with funds in FY 2018.\n\n(E) & (EE) - Expanded Food and Nutrition Education\
    \ Program \n(aka EFNEP)  [Smith-Lever - Section 3 (d)] - (Capacity previously\
    \ known as Formula) and EFNEP WebNEERS (Competitive)\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2018:\n\
    \nThe Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP) brings together federal,\
    \ state, and local resources to target two (2) primary audiences: low-income families\
    \ with young children and low-income youth.  The program is delivered by the 1862\
    \ and the 1890 Land-Grant Institutions.  Since 1969, EFNEP has reached more than\
    \ 34 million low-incomes families and youth, improving their diets and food-related\
    \ behaviors.  Each year EFNEP enrolls nearly half a million new program participants.\
    \  \n\nIn FY 2018, EFNEP received $67,417,320 in federal funding.  EFNEP reached\
    \ 90,325 adults and 345,440 youth directly; and more than 250,000 family members\
    \ indirectly (source: EFNEP’s evaluation and reporting system, WebNEERS; see 2018\
    \ Impacts on https:/2/nifa.usda.gov/program/expanded-food-and-nutrition-education-program-efnep).\
    \  81% of EFNEP participants who reported income were at or below 100% of poverty,\
    \ earning $25,100 a year or less for a family of four (4).  At least 72% of all\
    \ EFNEP adults identify as minorities.  This is significant because poor health\
    \ disproportionately affects minority and low-income populations.  \n\nEFNEP consistently\
    \ demonstrates strong results.  In FY 2018 a new research tested Adult Food and\
    \ Physical Activity Questionnaire was used.  Results show adult graduates:  \n\
    •\tImprove their diets:  91% improved their diet quality practices. \n•\tStretch\
    \ their food dollars farther:  80% improve food resource management practices,\
    \ such as planning meals and shopping with a grocery list \n•\tHandle food more\
    \ safely:  76% improve food safety practices, such as storing and thawing food\
    \ properly \n•\tActive more often:  77% increase their physical activity practices\n\
    \n(G), (H) & (W) – Farm Safety, Youth Farm Safety Education and Certification,\
    \ and Assistive Technology Program for Farmers with Disabilities (AgrAbility Project)\
    \ \n\nNOTE: Programs were combined in FY 2012.\n\nIn FY 2012 Congress consolidated\
    \ Extension 3(d) line items Farm Safety (AgrAbility) and Youth Farm Safety Education\
    \ and Certification (YFSEC) into a single line item.\n\nIn FY 2018, after legislatively\
    \ mandated set asides, approximately $4,417,289 was available to support AgrAbility\
    \ and YFSEC competitive grant programs. \n\nOf the above amount, $4,117,289 was\
    \ made available to support AgrAbility projects: 7 continuation awards, all State/Regional\
    \ AgrAbility Projects (SRAPs); one (1) continuation National AgrAbility Project\
    \ (NAP); and fourteen (14) new SRAPs. \n\nOf this amount, $300,000 was used to\
    \ support three (3) YFSEC continuation awards.\n\nAll AgrAbility projects are\
    \ partnerships between Cooperative Extension at 1862 and 1890 Land-Grant Colleges\
    \ and Universities and private non-profit organizations that provide direct service\
    \ to individuals with disabilities. SRAPs and NAP focus on increasing the likelihood\
    \ that individuals with disabilities and their families engaged in production\
    \ agriculture (AgrAbility’s customers) will become more successful. \n\nNIFA received\
    \ nineteen (19) new SRAP proposals in FY 2018 and competitively funded fourteen\
    \ (14). Funding ratio was 74%.\n\n(I) New Technologies at Ag Extension (aka NTAE)\n\
    \nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2018, NIFA awarded a continuation grant in the amount of\
    \ $1,488,000 to the New Technologies for Ag Extension (NTAE) program. In 2017,\
    \ eXtension continued to work from its FY 2015-2018 strategic plan which charged\
    \ eXtension to apply its technology expertise and broad national network to become\
    \ a major catalyst for increasing innovation and the impact of Cooperative Extension\
    \ Service (CES) professionals’ work throughout the entire CES.\n\n(J), (U), (V)\
    \ & (FF)  - Children, Youth, and Families At- Risk \n(aka CYFAR), Sustainable\
    \ Community Projects (aka CYFAR-SCP); Professional Development and Technical Assistance\
    \ (aka CYFAR-PDTA); and Military Partnership\nFISCAL YEAR (FY) 2018:\n\nTotal\
    \ CYFAR funding was $8,054,025. Sustainable Community Project funding represented\
    \ 45 successful applicants (new and continued awards) and successful applicants\
    \ will receive $7,040,000.00 for Fiscal Year 2018.  \n\nThe funding ratio for\
    \ new projects was 17%.\n\nThe CYFAR Professional and Development and Technical\
    \ Assistance (PDTA) funding was $563,340.\n\nThe CYFAR Military PDTA funding was\
    \ $450,000.\n\n(L) Federally-Recognized Tribes Extension Program  \n(aka FRTEP)\n\
    \nIn Fiscal Year 2018, the FRTEP program continued the second year into a new\
    \ four-year continuation. NIFA awarded $2,912,490 to 36 extension offices through\
    \ its 1862 Land Grant Universities. Awards ranged from $68,580 to $122,000. Funds\
    \ were used to support all 36 Extension offices, including attendance at the 2018\
    \ Extension Professional Development Conference in Tulsa, OK.\n\n(M) & (BB) -\
    \ Extension Services at the 1994 Institutions Program (aka Tribal Colleges Extension\
    \ Program and TCEP)  and  \nTribal Colleges Extension - Special Emphasis (aka\
    \ TCEP-SE)\n\nTribal Colleges Extension (TCEP) funds community based, informal\
    \ learning on rural reservations. Programs mainly involve youth development and\
    \ may also include the promotion of rural entrepreneurship, healthy lifestyles\
    \ and production agriculture. Every other year eligible institutions can complete\
    \ for Tribal Colleges Extension - Special Emphasis (TCEP-SE) which funds pilot\
    \ projects for informal, community focused learning. \n\nExtension capacity and\
    \ Extension Special Emphasis both fall under continuations which means applicants\
    \ complete once and receive annual allotments of funding for multiple “out years”\
    \ that conclude in a set timeframe. At the conclusion of a funding cycle a new\
    \ grant competition is held. TCEP capacity grants provide a baseline of funding\
    \ for extension operations over a four-year period. TCEP special emphasis provides\
    \ funding for pilot projects over a two year cycle.\n\nIn 2018 the TCEP capacity\
    \ was paneled and TCEP Special Emphasis was paneled.\n\nThe program awarded $6,171,488\
    \ to states to support informal community education at the 1994 Land Grant institutions.\
    \ In 2018 33 proposals were accepted for review and for TCEP capacity 33 were\
    \ awarded. The TCEP Special Emphasis is competitive and 23 proposals were submitted\
    \ and 11 were awarded.\n\n(N) & (O) -  Renewable Resources Extension Act Program\
    \ – \n(aka RREA) (Capacity, previously known as Formula)\nand - National Focus\
    \ Fund (Competitive) Projects (aka RREA-NFF)\n\nCapacity program impacts resulted\
    \ in:\n•\tNumber of educational events – 5,945\n•\tNumber of landowners adopting\
    \ at least one new  management practice – 134,892\n•\tNumber of forest and rangeland\
    \ acres impacted – 19,915,053\n•\tNumber of management plans developed – 5,062\n\
    •\tNumber of forest, range, fish and wildlife income-generating businesses created\
    \ or expanded – 5,144\n•\tNumber of new jobs created – 558\n\n(P) Rural Health\
    \ and Safety (aka Rural Health & Safety Education)\n\n$2,871,015.00\n25 applications\
    \ were reviewed\n9 proposals funded \nRepresents 36 percent acceptance rate\n\n\
    (Q) 1890 Facilities Grant Program (aka Section 1447 Grants)\n\nThe appropriated\
    \ amount was $19,730,000.  The amount available to support 19 facilities projects\
    \ was $18,940,800, (one per 1890 land-grant university).  Funding levels ranged\
    \ from $701,302 to $1,510,956.\n\n(R) Food Animal Residue Avoidance Database Program\
    \ \n(aka FARAD) \n\nFor the Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 award cycle, Congress appropriated\
    \ $2.5 million. The amount available for awards was $2.4 million to support FARAD,\
    \ which was funded under its own line item authority.\n\nFive (5) applications\
    \ were received and evaluated under competition waiver administrative processes.\
    \  FARAD applications were merit reviewed internally by National Program Staff\
    \ and all five (5) entities were funded.   \n\nThis 32-year-old high performing\
    \ integrated consortium of collaborating institutions currently includes at each\
    \ Land Grant campus a lead Project Director (PD), and his/her respective scientific\
    \ staff.  \n\t\nThe funding ratio for this program in FY 2018 was 100% due to\
    \ the competition waiver process.\n\nFARAD is a university-based national program\
    \ that serves as the nation’s primary source for scientifically-based recommendations\
    \ regarding safe withdrawal intervals of drugs (used off label) and chemicals\
    \ in food-producing animals. As such, FARAD is a key resource for protection of\
    \ our nation's food supply, including meat, milk and eggs, against accidental\
    \ contamination of animal-derived foods with residues of drugs, pesticides or\
    \ other agents that could compromise food safety.\n\n(T) Agriculture Risk Management\
    \ Education Program \n(aka RME Program);\n\nNOTE: Mandatory program delegated\
    \ to another USDA agency (Risk Management Agency) but administered by NIFA. \n\
    \nIn FY 2018, NIFA announced the Agriculture Risk Management Education Partnerships\
    \ (RME) Program Centers as a Competitive Grant in the amount of $4,483,200 to\
    \ be divided among the host centers as follows: \n•\tDigital Center  for RME:\
    \ $355,968\n•\tNortheastern Center for RME: $879,024\n•\tSouthern Center for RME:\
    \ $1,082,736\n•\tNorth Central Center for RME: $ 1,082,736\n•\tWestern Center\
    \ for RME: $1,082,736\n\nThe grant deadline was April 27, 2018. \n\nSix (6) proposals\
    \ were submitted and reviewed by a panel of four (4) reviewers. \n\nFive (5) proposals\
    \ were recommended for funding.\n\n(DD) Healthy Homes Partnership\n\nOne (1) award\
    \ for $315,000 was provided to a Coordinating Institution that administered sub\
    \ awards to 10 state-level participating land-grant universities.  The purpose\
    \ of the Healthy Homes Partnership is to link the resources of the USDA National\
    \ Institute of Food & Agriculture Land Grant Universities with the U.S. Department\
    \ of Housing and Urban Development, Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy\
    \ Homes for a public outreach program that reduces housing deficiencies and risks\
    \ associated with childhood diseases and injuries. The project reduced hazards\
    \ in the home related to air quality (carbon monoxide, radon, and mold), drinking\
    \ water, pests, and pesticides to improve families’ health resulting in decrease\
    \ in asthma & allergies and improved home safety.\n\n(GG) Agriculture in the Classroom\n\
    \nNIFA provided $529,920 to support Agriculture in the Classroom (AITC). AITC\
    \ programs were implemented by state-operated programs to improve agricultural\
    \ literacy, awareness, knowledge, and appreciation among pre-K through 12th-grade\
    \ teachers and their students. \n\nIn FY 2018, the National AITC curriculum website\
    \ (agclassroom.org) had over 336,000 visitors (a 26% increase over the previous\
    \ year) who accessed 405 standards-based lesson plans and 785 companion resources.\
    \ \n\nOver 1 million teachers and 7 million students were reached through direct\
    \ contact through AITC staff and volunteers in FY 2017. \n\n(HH) Air Force Personal\
    \ Financial Readiness Program Evaluation Development\n\nFunding available was\
    \ $454,545.\n\n(II)  Substance Abuse Program at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas\n\
    \nThe actual funding for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 was $296,933.\n\n(JJ) National\
    \ Food and Agricultural Sciences Teaching, Extension, and Research Awards (aka\
    \ Food and Agriculture Service Learning Program, TEACH, TERA and TA)\n\nFor Fiscal\
    \ Year 2018, no funds were appropriated to support the TEACH Program. The program\
    \ ran on a no-cost extension.\n\nIn FY 2017 the program was funded as a sole-source\
    \ cooperative agreement.\n\n(KK) Youth Support and Internship Program\nNo action\
    \ is required for this Program, which was funded in Fiscal Year 2019. This program\
    \ was not established in FY 18.\n\n(LL) Military REACH\n\nThe actual funding for\
    \ Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 was $600,000.\n\n(MM) Yellow Ribbon Reintegration Program\
    \ Curriculum Development & Metrics\n\nThe actual funding for Fiscal Year (FY)\
    \ 2018 was $540,000.\n\n(NN) Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness\n\nThe\
    \ actual funding for Fiscal Year (FY) 2018 was $2,395,456.\n\nThe listing below\
    \ represents Programs which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action\
    \ is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:  \n\n(F) Pest Management\n\n\
    NOTE: \nProgram was subsequently, consolidated under CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection\
    \ and Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(K) Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education\
    \ - Professional Development (aka SARE-PD and SARE Chapter 3 Program);\n\nNOTE:\
    \ SARE Chapters 1 & 3 were combined in FY 2014. \nSee CFDA # 10.215. \n\n(S) Grants\
    \ to Youth Serving Institutions \n(aka Rural Youth Development Grants Program\
    \ and RYD);\n\n(X) Extension IPM Coordination and Support Program (IPM-CS);\n\n\
    Program was subsequently, consolidated under CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and\
    \ Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(Y) Extension Outreach on the Marketplace Exchanges\
    \ of the Affordable Care Act; and\n\n\n(AA) Second Language & Culture Exposure\
    \ for Children Project (aka SLCECY)."
  year: '2018'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2019 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(G), (H) & (W) – Farm\
    \ Safety, Youth Farm Safety Education and Certification, and Assistive Technology\
    \ Program for Farmers with Disabilities (AgrAbility Project) \n\nNOTE: Programs\
    \ were combined in FY 2012.\n\nIn FY 2019, the AgrAbility and Youth Farm Safety\
    \ Education and Certification (YFSEC) Programs received $4,424,475 combined to\
    \ make awards. Of this amount, $300,000 was used to support three (3) YFSEC continuation\
    \ awards. Reminder of the funding, was used to support AgrAbility projects. \n\
    \nOf the funding available for the AgrAbility program in FY 2019 ($4,124,475),\
    \ some $3,576,805 was used to meet funding obligations toward eighteen (18) continuation\
    \ State and Regional AgrAbility (SRAPs) and one (1) continuation National AgrAbility\
    \ (NAP). Remainder of the funding, $547,670, was made available for new awards.\
    \ \n\nFY 2019 RFA for new SRAPs was released in March 2019. NIFA received eight\
    \ (8) proposals of which six (6) were eligible for funding consideration. NIFA\
    \ was able to fund top three (3) proposals. The funding ratio was 50%. The new\
    \ awards are expected to be announced in August, 2019. \n\n(I) New Technologies\
    \ at Ag Extension (aka NTAE)\n\nIn Fiscal Year (FY) 2019, NIFA competed NTAE funding\
    \ in the amount of $1,488,000 and will issue a single 4-year continuation award.\
    \  \n\n(DD) Healthy Homes Partnership\n\nOne (1) award for $450,000 is anticipated\
    \ to be provided to a Coordinating Institution that will administer sub awards\
    \ to at least 18 state-level participating land-grant universities. This project\
    \ is a continuation of the work established in the prior fiscal year.\n\n(GG)\
    \ Agriculture in the Classroom (AITC)\n\nIn FY 2019, USDA-NIFA will provide $529,920\
    \ to support Agriculture in the Classroom. \n\nAnticipate increases to the number\
    \ of free curriculum resources nationally available in FY 2019. Anticipate maintenance\
    \ of number of students and teacher directly contacted through AITC with program\
    \ to enhance capacity to teach agricultural literacy. Anticipate maintenance of\
    \ the number of students directly contacted through AITC.\n\n(HH) Air Force Personal\
    \ Financial Readiness Program Evaluation Development\n\nProgram did not received\
    \ funding in FY 19.\n\n(II)  Substance Abuse Program at Joint Base San Antonio,\
    \ Texas\n\nThe actual funding that will be awarded in FY 2019 is $302,793.\n\n\
    (JJ) National Food and Agricultural Sciences Teaching, Extension, and Research\
    \ Awards (aka Food and Agriculture Service Learning Program, TEACH, TERA and TA)\n\
    \nFor Fiscal Year 2019, $100,000 was available for the National Teaching Awards\
    \ Program,\n\nThe purpose of TERA award is to recognize and promote excellence\
    \ in teaching in the food and agricultural sciences within U.S. colleges and universities.\
    \ \nFor the purposes of this RFA, teaching is defined to include all aspects of\
    \ developing human capital in order to help meet current and future national food,\
    \ agricultural, natural resources, and human sciences (FANH) workplace needs.\n\
    \nThe project grantee supports the selection and recognition of award recipients\
    \ at the Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities (APLU) Winter Meeting\
    \ in consultation with NIFA. \n\n(KK) Youth Support and Internship Program\n\n\
    Available funding was $900,000.\n\n(LL) Military REACH\n\nThe actual funding that\
    \ will be awarded in FY 2019 is $700,000.\n\n(MM) Yellow Ribbon Reintegration\
    \ Program Curriculum Development & Metrics\n\nThe actual funding that will be\
    \ awarded in FY 2019 is $585,000.\n\n(NN) Clearinghouse for Military Family Readiness\n\
    \nThe actual funding that will be awarded in FY 2019 is $5,357,583.\n\n\nThe following\
    \ list represents FY 2019 newly created CFDA numbers, which was part of an initiative\
    \ to break out the separate programs formerly contained in CFDA # 10.500. \nPlease\
    \ see the FY 2019 Reference for pertinent details.\n\nFY ’18 Ref\tFY ’19 Ref\t\
    Program Title\n10.500 (A)\t10.511 (A)\t(Joint) Cooperative Extension Programs\
    \ at 1862 Land-grant Institutions (1862 LGIs) (Capacity Grant Program)\n10.500\
    \ (B)\t10.511 (B)\tCooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-Grant Institutions\
    \ (Smith-Lever Special Needs) \n(Capacity Grant Program)\n10.500 (C)\t10.511 (C)\t\
    Smith-Lever Special Needs Competitive Grants Program (aka SLSNCGP)\n10.500 (CC)\t\
    10.511 (D)\t(Joint) University of the District of Columbia Public Postsecondary\
    \ Education Reorganization Act Program (DCPPERA)\n10.500 (D)\t10.512\tAgriculture\
    \ Extension at 1890 Land-grant Institutions \n(1890 LGIs-Section 1444)\n\n10.500\
    \ (Q)\t10.513\t1890 Facilities Grants Program   (1890 FGP)\n\n10.500 (E)\t10.514\t\
    Expanded Food and Nutrition Education Program (EFNEP)\n\n10.500 (N) and\n10.500\
    \ (O)\t10.515\tRenewable Resources Extension Act (RREA) \nand\nNational Focus\
    \ Fund Projects (RREA-NFF)\n10.500 (P)\t10.516\tRural Health and Safety Education\
    \ Competitive Grants Program (RHSE)\n\n10.500 (M)\t10.517 (A)\tExtension Services\
    \ at the 1994 Institutions Program (aka Tribal Colleges Extension Program and\
    \ TCEP)  \n10.500 (BB)\t10.517 (B)\tTribal Colleges Extension - Special Emphasis\
    \ (aka TCEP-SE)\n\n10.500 (L)\t10.517 (C)\tFederally-Recognized Tribes Extension\
    \ Program  \n(aka FRTEP)\n\n\n10.500 (R)\t10.518\tFood Animal Residue Avoidance\
    \ Databank (FARAD)\n10.500 (T)\t10.520\tAgriculture Risk Management Education\
    \ Partnerships Competitive Grants Program (ARME and RME)\n\n10.500 (J)\t10.521\
    \ (A)\tChildren, Youth, and Families At- Risk \n(aka CYFAR)\n10.500 (U)\t10.521\
    \ (B)\tSustainable Community Projects (aka CYFAR-SCP);\n10.500 (V)\t10.521 (C)\t\
    Professional and Development and Technical Assistance (aka CYFAR-PDTA)\n10.500\
    \ (FF)\t10.521 (D)\tMilitary Partnerships\n\n\nThe listing below represents Programs\
    \ which have not been recently funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N)\
    \ for the following Programs:  \n\n(F) Pest Management\n\nNOTE: \nProgram was\
    \ subsequently, consolidated under CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management\
    \ (CPPM).\n(K) Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education - Professional Development\
    \ (aka SARE-PD and SARE Chapter 3 Program);\n\nNOTE: SARE Chapters 1 & 3 were\
    \ combined in FY 2014. \nSee CFDA # 10.215. \n\n(S) Grants to Youth Serving Institutions\
    \ \n(aka Rural Youth Development Grants Program and RYD);\n\n(X) Extension IPM\
    \ Coordination and Support Program (IPM-CS);\n\nProgram was subsequently, consolidated\
    \ under CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(Y) Extension\
    \ Outreach on the Marketplace Exchanges of the Affordable Care Act; and \n\n(AA)\
    \ Second Language & Culture Exposure for Children Project (aka SLCECY)."
  year: '2019'
- description: "Fiscal Year (FY) 2020 – ACTIVE Programs: \n\n(G), (H) & (W) – Farm\
    \ Safety, Youth Farm Safety Education and Certification, and Assistive Technology\
    \ Program for Farmers with Disabilities (AgrAbility Project) \n\nNOTE: Programs\
    \ were combined in FY 2012.\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been established\
    \ by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nPertinent details will be provided by Farm\
    \ Safety Program at a future date.\n\n(I) New Technologies at Ag Extension (aka\
    \ NTAE)\n\nThis program is subject to congressional budget approval for FY 2020.\
    \ Should funding provided and based upon successful project performance, it is\
    \ anticipated that continuation funding in the amount of $1,488,000 will be awarded.\n\
    \n(DD) Healthy Homes Partnership\n\nContinuation of this project will be contingent\
    \ upon availability of funding through the Interagency Agreement of USDA National\
    \ Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) with Housing and Urban Development\
    \ (HUD) Office of Lead Hazard Control and Healthy Homes or another source of funding.\
    \ Pertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\nGG) Agriculture\
    \ in the Classroom (AITC)\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been established\
    \ by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program is funded in FY 2020, it\
    \ is anticipated that the funding level and types of projects will be similar.\n\
    \nAnticipate increases to the number of free curriculum resources nationally available\
    \ in FY 2020. Anticipate maintenance of number of students and teacher directly\
    \ contacted through AITC with program to enhance capacity to teach agricultural\
    \ literacy. Anticipate maintenance of the number of students directly contacted\
    \ through AITC. \n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future\
    \ date.\n\n(HH) Air Force Personal Financial Readiness Program Evaluation Development\n\
    \nProgram will not receive funding in FY 20.\n\n(II)  Substance Abuse Program\
    \ at Joint Base San Antonio, Texas\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet\
    \ been established by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program is funded\
    \ in FY 2020, it is anticipated that the funding level and types of projects will\
    \ be similar.\n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\
    \n(JJ) National Food and Agricultural Sciences Teaching, Extension, and Research\
    \ Awards (aka Food and Agriculture Service Learning Program, TEACH, TERA and TA)\n\
    \nThe FY 2020 funding level is of $100,000.  This will be year 2 of a four-year\
    \ continuation award.\nHowever, for Fiscal Year (FY) 2020, it is projected that\
    \ approximately $100,000 will be appropriated to support one project.  \nA total\
    \ of 40 award nominations are expected for the Regional and National Teaching\
    \ Awards. There will be no new projects.\n\n(KK) Youth Support and Internship\
    \ Program\n\nAnticipated funding is $900,000\n\n(LL) Military REACH\n\nThe FY\
    \ 2020 funding levels have not yet been established by Congressional Appropriations.\
    \ \n\nIf this Program is funded in FY 2020, it is anticipated that the funding\
    \ level and types of projects will be similar.\n\nPertinent details will be provided\
    \ by Program at a future date.\n\n(MM) Yellow Ribbon Reintegration Program Curriculum\
    \ Development & Metrics\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been established\
    \ by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program is funded in FY 2020, it\
    \ is anticipated that the funding level and types of projects will be similar.\n\
    \nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\n(NN) Clearinghouse\
    \ for Military Family Readiness\n\nThe FY 2020 funding levels have not yet been\
    \ established by Congressional Appropriations. \n\nIf this Program is funded in\
    \ FY 2020, it is anticipated that the funding level and types of projects will\
    \ be similar.\n\nPertinent details will be provided by Program at a future date.\n\
    \nThe following list represents CFDA numbers created FY 2019, as part of the initiative\
    \ to break out the separate programs formerly contained in CFDA # 10.500. \nPlease\
    \ see the FY 2020 Reference for pertinent details.\n\nFY ’20 Ref\tProgram Title\n\
    10.511 (A)\t(Joint) Cooperative Extension Programs at 1862 Land-grant Institutions\
    \ (1862 LGIs) (Capacity Grant Program)\n10.511 (B)\tCooperative Extension Programs\
    \ at 1862 Land-Grant Institutions (Smith-Lever Special Needs) \n(Capacity Grant\
    \ Program)\n10.511 (C)\tSmith-Lever Special Needs Competitive Grants Program (aka\
    \ SLSNCGP)\n10.511 (D)\t(Joint) University of the District of Columbia Public\
    \ Postsecondary Education Reorganization Act Program (DCPPERA)\n10.512\tAgriculture\
    \ Extension at 1890 Land-grant Institutions \n(1890 LGIs-Section 1444)\n\n10.513\t\
    1890 Facilities Grants Program   (1890 FGP)\n\n10.514\tExpanded Food and Nutrition\
    \ Education Program (EFNEP)\n\n10.515\tRenewable Resources Extension Act (RREA)\
    \ \nand\nNational Focus Fund Projects (RREA-NFF)\n10.516\tRural Health and Safety\
    \ Education Competitive Grants Program (RHSE)\n\n10.517 (A)\tExtension Services\
    \ at the 1994 Institutions Program (aka Tribal Colleges Extension Program and\
    \ TCEP)  \n10.517 (B)\tTribal Colleges Extension - Special Emphasis (aka TCEP-SE)\n\
    \n10.517 (C)\tFederally-Recognized Tribes Extension Program  \n(aka FRTEP)\n\n\
    10.518\tFood Animal Residue Avoidance Databank (FARAD)\n10.520\tAgriculture Risk\
    \ Management Education Partnerships Competitive Grants Program (ARME and RME)\n\
    \n10.521 (A)\tChildren, Youth, and Families At- Risk \n(aka CYFAR)\n10.521 (B)\t\
    Sustainable Community Projects (aka CYFAR-SCP);\n10.521 (C)\tProfessional and\
    \ Development and Technical Assistance (aka CYFAR-PDTA)\n10.521 (D)\tMilitary\
    \ Partnerships\n\nThe listing below represents Programs which have not been recently\
    \ funded. Hence, no further action is required (N/A/N) for the following Programs:\
    \  \n\n(F) Pest Management\n\nNOTE: \nProgram was subsequently, consolidated under\
    \ CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(K) Sustainable\
    \ Agriculture Research and Education - Professional Development (aka SARE-PD and\
    \ SARE Chapter 3 Program)\n\nNOTE: SARE Chapters 1 & 3 were combined in FY 2014.\
    \ \nSee CFDA # 10.215. \n\n(S) Grants to Youth Serving Institutions \n(aka Rural\
    \ Youth Development Grants Program and RYD)\n\n(X) Extension IPM Coordination\
    \ and Support Program (IPM-CS)\n\nProgram was subsequently, consolidated under\
    \ CFDA # 10.329, Crop Protection and Pest Management (CPPM).\n\n(Y) Extension\
    \ Outreach on the Marketplace Exchanges of the Affordable Care Act and\n\n\n(AA)\
    \ Second Language & Culture Exposure for Children Project (aka SLCECY)."
  year: '2020'
- description: 'Air Force 4-H Military Partnership Outreach Support Grant Program:
    5 applications received, 2 awards made.


    Mentoring at Risk and Rural Youth program: 7 applications received 6 awards made.'
  year: '2024'
rules_regulations: "As an administrator of U.S. government support, NIFA works in\
  \ partnership with grantees to ensure responsible stewardship of federal funds.\
  \ Our grantees and partners are required to comply with all relevant rules and regulations.\
  \ The following resources are provided to NIFA’s partners and award recipients to\
  \ support their adherence to federal regulations governing program performance:\n\
  \nNIFA’s primary (main) website:\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/regulations-and-guidelines\n\
  \nThe following represent specific documents and direct links:\n\nPOLICY GUIDE\n\
  NIFA’s Federal Assistance Policy Guide describes agency policies and procedures.\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/policy-guide\n\nCERTIFICATIONS AND REPRESENTATIONS\nCertifications\
  \ and representations provided through the NIFA application process.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/certifications-and-representations\n\
  \n\nACKNOWLEDGEMENT OF USDA SUPPORT BY NIFA\nWhen acknowledging USDA support in\
  \ accordance with 2 CFR Part 415, grantees must use the following acknowledgement\
  \ for all projects or initiatives supported by NIFA.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/acknowledgment-usda-support-nifa\n\
  \nFEDERAL REGULATIONS\nThe Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) lists all regulations\
  \ published in the Federal Register.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/federal-regulations\n\
  \nFOIA\nThe Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) provides that any person has the right\
  \ to request access to federal documents and information such as research data.\n\
  https://nifa.usda.gov/foia\n\nNEPA POLICY AND GUIDANCE\nThe National Environmental\
  \ Policy Act (NEPA) Policy and Guidance set the standard for identifying potential\
  \ environmental impacts.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/nepa-policy-and-guidance\n\nOGFM\
  \ ISSUED CORRESPONDENCE\nThe Office of Grants and Financial Management occasionally\
  \ issues correspondence to applicants, grantees, and/or the general public for informational\
  \ or clarification purposes.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/ogfm-issued-correspondence\n\
  \nRESEARCH MISCONDUCT\nNIFA requires that all its awardees adhere to the USDA Scientific\
  \ Integrity Policy and the Federal Policy on Research Misconduct.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/research-misconduct\
  \ \n\nNIFA’S GENERAL AWARD TERMS AND CONDITIONS\n\nAward terms and conditions are\
  \ determined by statutory, regulatory, and agency requirements, as well as each\
  \ grant’s circumstances. Terms and conditions dictate important items related to\
  \ your grant, including method of payment, reporting frequency and content, and\
  \ prior approval requirements.\n\nReferences to the terms and conditions of awards\
  \ are located on the NIFA 2009 Award Fact Sheet. NIFA's general award terms and\
  \ conditions (see link below) is applicable to this program, for awards with an\
  \ award date on December 26, 2014 and thereafter.\nhttps://nifa.usda.gov/resource/nifa-general-terms-and-conditions-grants-and-cooperative-agreements-october-2016."
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/137c5c7d9cea454b8c026401f032d7aa/view
sub-agency: National Institute of Food and Agriculture
title: Cooperative Extension Service
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=2563fe145400413eb39e3a932b9f0100
---
