---
agency: Department of Justice
applicant_types:
- Local (includes State-designated lndian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions
assistance_types:
- Direct Loans
- Formula Grants
- Guaranteed / Insured Loans
authorizations:
- text: 34 U.S.C. &sect; 10421.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/uscode/34/10421
- text: 133 Stat. 2317, 2409.
  url: null
- text: Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act of 1994. Pub. L. 103, 322.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/103/public/322
- text: Department of Justice Appropriations Act, 2023. Pub. L. 117, 328.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/117/public/328
beneficiary_types:
- Alcoholic
- Drug Addict
- Local
- Mentally Disabled
- State
- U.S. Territories
categories:
- Health - Alcoholism, Drug Abuse and Mental Health - General
- Health - Alcoholism, Drug Abuse and Mental Health - Law Enforcement
- Health - Education and Training
- Health - Facility Planning and Construction
- Health - General Health and Medical
- Health - Health Services Planning and Technical Assistance
- Health - Indian Health
- Health - Specialized Health Research and Training
cfda: '16.593'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=16.593
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "The goal of the RSAT for State Prisoners Program is to assist state, local,\
  \ and tribal efforts to increase access to evidence-based prevention and Substance\
  \ Use Disorder (SUD) treatment and reduce overdose deaths.\n\nThe objectives are\
  \ to:\n•\tEnhance the capabilities of state, local, or tribal governments to initiate\
  \ or continue evidence-based SUD or co-occurring substance use and mental health\
  \ disorder treatment programs in the nation’s prisons and jails.\n\n•\tIncrease\
  \ the number of prisons and jails offering MAT to incarcerated individuals with\
  \ Opioid Use Disorder (OUD).\n\n•\tPrepare individuals for reintegration into communities,\
  \ including supporting continuity of treatment for OUD treatment and recovery supports\
  \ prior to release.\n\n•\tAssist individuals and communities through the reentry\
  \ process by delivering community-based treatment, recovery, and other broad-based\
  \ aftercare services to support successful reentry and continuity of care.\n\nPerformance\
  \ Measure 1: Number of participants in RSAT; and,\n\nPerformance Measure 2: Percent\
  \ jail based/residential successful completions."
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":36851973.0,"usa_spending_actual":37119503.78},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":45000000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":40245869.99},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":35000000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":-1101849.89}]'
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":6424012.63,"obligation":37215245.0},{"x":"2023","outlay":235702.77,"obligation":39346549.79},{"x":"2024","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/16.593.html
popular_name: (RSAT)
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "1)\tSince September 2017, there have been 11 webinars, with up to\
    \ 500 participants, including those downloading podcasts of the webinars. \n2)\t\
    The RSAT website interactive forum has sponsored three discussions, attracting\
    \ a total of 694 participants.\n\n3)\tRSAT TTA faculty has provided on-site technical\
    \ assistance to jails in California and prisons in Michigan as well as off-site\
    \ technical assistance in more than a dozen other states. \n\n4)\tRSAT TTA convened\
    \ two national roundtables to develop Promising Practices Guidelines for Residential\
    \ Substance Abuse Treatment and Jail-Based Medication-Assisted Treatment, Promising\
    \ Practices, Guidelines, and Resources for the Field. The roundtables included\
    \ representatives of SAMHSA, NIC, NIJ, NIDA, BJA, and ONDCP as well as nongovernment\
    \ organizations, American Probation and Parole Association, American Correctional\
    \ Association, American Society of Addiction Medicine, National Sheriffs’ Association,\
    \ and the National Association of Drug Court Professionals as well as researchers\
    \ and RSAT practitioners from Kentucky, New York, Rhode Island, Massachusetts,\
    \ California and Maryland.\n\n5)\tThrough its technical assistance, webinars and\
    \ conference presentation, including presenting at the National Sheriffs’ Association\
    \ State Authority, RSAT TTA has aggressively promoted the expansion of prison\
    \ and jail MAT programming contributing to a new jail MAT program being opened\
    \ on average every two weeks across the country. In addition, a half dozen state\
    \ departments of corrections have established MAT programming in at least one\
    \ prison facility over this fiscal year.\n\n6)\tThrough two webinars, RSAT TTA\
    \ has introduced two new innovative adjuncts for model jail and prison drug treatment\
    \ programs and reentry. The first featured the use of electronic tablets that\
    \ inmates take with them when they reenter the community to better help them realize\
    \ transitional and reentry plans and referrals made before release. So far, only\
    \ Utah’s Department of Corrections and Parole Department have implemented this\
    \ program.  The second featured development of model naloxone distribution programs\
    \ for exiting inmates and their families that has been shown to reduce the heightened\
    \ risk of overdose deaths among recently released inmates. So far at least two\
    \ state departments of corrections and a dozen jails have implemented this program.\n\
    \n7)\tPromising Practices Guidelines for Residential Substance Abuse Treatment\
    \ was released in November, 2017 and has been widely circulated and cited by a\
    \ major nongovernment organization in its funding of prison and jail treatment\
    \ and reform program. Jail-Based Medication-Assisted Treatment, Promising Practices,\
    \ Guidelines, and Resources for the Field is due to be released shortly by the\
    \ National Sheriffs’ Association. Already, the California correctional officials\
    \ have requested copies for twenty sheriffs funded this year to establish medication-assisted\
    \ treatment in their jails."
  year: '2017'
- description: "Since September 2018, there have been 8 webinars attended by a total\
    \ of 776 registered attendees plus another approximately 150 downloading podcasts\
    \ of the webinars. \nThe RSAT website interactive forum has sponsored five discussions,\
    \ attracting a total of 657 participants.\n\nRSAT TTA faculty has provided on-site\
    \ technical assistance to jails in Massachusetts, Missouri, Guam, Colorado, and\
    \ prisons in Connecticut, Louisiana and Georgia, as well as off-site technical\
    \ assistance in more than a dozen other states. \n\n In November of 2018, AHP\
    \ initiated a survey of state and county level RSAT programs across the country\
    \ and US territories in an effort to obtain short descriptions of programming\
    \ and operations. Most questions asked to RSAT Directors were based upon the PPG\
    \ for RSAT, providing AHP with information to recognize that a more comprehensive\
    \ fidelity assessment for RSAT programs would be beneficial. With the help field\
    \ experts, AHP staff drafted a Fidelity Assessment Instrument (FAI) for RSAT.\
    \ \n\nThe FAI is based on the seven Promising Practices Guidelines for RSAT programs,\
    \ obtains information through a combination of structured interviews and requested\
    \ materials / data.  A mixture of six county and state RSAT Programs were chosen\
    \ to pilot the FAI, all originally a program interviewed for the RSAT survey.\
    \  Each FAI pilot site has helped to revise the instrument to become more efficient\
    \ as well as relevant to the Promising Practices Guidelines.  The goal of the\
    \ Fidelity Assessment Instrument- Revised (FAI-R) is to help strengthen state\
    \ and local RSAT Program operations and services and to promote evidence-based\
    \ / promising practices to better accomplish its mission of providing treatment\
    \ to incarcerated individuals with substance use disorders. \n\nRSAT-TTA staff\
    \ have developed and updated guides and references in response to requests from\
    \ RSAT programs around the country.\n\nRole of Corrections Officers in Jail/Prison\
    \ Substance Use Disorder Treatment Programs (RSAT) was developed to enhance correctional\
    \ officers understanding of substance use disorder treatment programs and their\
    \ role in contributing to the goals and objectives of these programs, namely breaking\
    \ the cycle of drug use and contributing to public safety. Correctional Officers\
    \ that review and reference this guide will gain a better understanding of the\
    \ role RSAT substance use disorder treatment plays in addressing criminogenic\
    \ risk factors and presumably will be more invested in contributing to the success\
    \ of both individual inmates under their supervision and the overall treatment\
    \ program.\n\nThe RSAT Training Tool - Preventing, Detecting and Treating HIV/AIDS\
    \ and Viral Hepatitis:  Health Promotion and Risk/Harm Reduction in Substance\
    \ Abuse Treatment was updated to educate RSAT staff about long-term treatment\
    \ programs about prevention, the benefits of testing and early identification,\
    \ and the availability of treatment. RSAT staff will also be able to offer support\
    \ to clients diagnosed with serious health conditions so they can learn to cope,\
    \ make informed choices about medical care, and take responsibility for protecting\
    \ others from exposure. Ensuring RSAT clients are screened and tested for HIV\
    \ and other infectious diseases and that they understand how to protect themselves,\
    \ their partners and companions are all recommended components of addiction treatment.\n\
    \nComprehensive Update on State Medicaid Coverage of Medication-Assisted Treatments\
    \ and Substance Use Disorder Services was also updated. The most recently updated\
    \ version of this manual builds on the foundational knowledge of ASAM’s comprehensive\
    \ review of state Medicaid coverage for FDA-approved medications and treatment\
    \ services for individuals with opioid use disorders (OUDs) and SAMHSA’s review\
    \ of state Medicaid coverage of medications for all substance use disorders also\
    \ added information on coverage of drugs approved for MAT of alcohol use disorders\
    \ (AUDs). Revisions reflect changes in Medicaid coverage for relevant services\
    \ and to preferred drug lists/formularies. Changes to Medicaid Managed Care coverage\
    \ guidelines, provisions of waiver applications and approved programs, and the\
    \ implementation status of work requirements in various states have also been\
    \ added. Overdose fatality rates for 2016 are based on Centers for Disease Control\
    \ final mortality data, and projected provisional drug overdose fatality rates\
    \ for 2017, as of August 2018. A summary of state prescription drug monitoring\
    \ program (PDMP) mandates has been added.\n\nHealth Literacy:  Health and Wellness\
    \ Recovery, Self-Management Tools for RSAT, Prison, Jail, and Aftercare Programs\
    \ provides suggestions for health promotion activities and priorities for RSAT\
    \ programs. It offers RSAT staff tools for assessing health literacy levels, materials\
    \ that introduce health and wellness as a component of recovery self-management,\
    \ and ways of increasing access to post-release care. It also includes a section\
    \ on overdose prevention that can help RSAT programs impart basic, potentially\
    \ life-saving information to participants."
  year: '2018'
- description: 'As of May 2019, the FAI has been piloted in two RSAT programs in state
    prisons (Tennessee DOC and a state Community Corrections program in Arkansas)
    and one RSAT program at a county jail (Essex County Sheriff’s Department in Massachusetts).
    The instrument and process has become more efficient since the first pilot site,
    and the goal is to prepare a revised Fidelity Assessment Instrument and process
    that can be implemented in corrections departments with RSAT-funded programs around
    the country.


    RSAT-TTA is in the process of collaborating with the National Criminal Justice
    Association (NCJA, International Community Corrections Association (ICCA) and
    Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA) to plan the 2019 Forum on Criminal Justice
    in Arlington, VA this September.'
  year: '2019'
- description: "BJA has continued to champion MAT in a variety of training and technical\
    \ assistance programs. Federally funded RSAT prison and jail RSAT programs continue\
    \ to take the lead in expanding correctional medication-assisted treatment programs\
    \ across the United States.  Not only are the number of prisons and jails offering\
    \ MAT continuing to increase every month, but more and more are expanding MAT\
    \ access to multiple opioid medications, including methadone and buprenorphine\
    \ as well as naltrexone.  \n\nBJA has concentrated in the past year on both promoting\
    \ expansion of MAT to include both agonist as well as antagonist medications and\
    \ to expand jail MAT programs to persons detained pretrial in jails, more than\
    \ 10 million each year, as well as those committed after sentence.  For example,\
    \ the RSAT program in the jail serving Berkshire County in western Massachusetts\
    \ which had pioneered MAT featuring injectable naltrexone for sentenced persons,\
    \ is now expanding its MAT to include the many more persons detained for shorter\
    \ pretrial periods and is providing access to agonist medications as well as antagonist.\
    \ It also now provides, consistent with the developing research, multiple naltrexone\
    \ injections prior to release to maximize craving reductions before persons reenter\
    \ the community.\n\nThere are now more than 135 jails and prisons systems in 32\
    \ states and the District of Columbia that offer at least two opioid medications,\
    \ up from just 35 two years ago. Many directly benefited from BJA’s extensive\
    \ training and technical assistance in implementing these programs.  \nBJA continued\
    \ its highly effective prison and jail MAT mentor host site trainings, allowing\
    \ 26 corrections teams from 18 states to visit model MAT programs in the Middlesex\
    \ House of Correction and the Philadelphia Department of Prisons. Both of these\
    \ host sites not only provide participants with access to all opioid medications\
    \ but also offer robust reentry and aftercare programming after release."
  year: '2020'
- description: "The RSAT Program accomplishments:\n•\tSupported the participation\
    \ of approximately 21,000 individuals in RSAT programs in FY 2021 with all receiving\
    \ substance use treatment services. Participants receiving services in jail are\
    \ suggested to remain in the program for a minimum of 3 months, while participants\
    \ in prison-based programs must remain in the program for a minimum of 6 months.\
    \ In addition to receiving treatment for substance use disorder treatment, many\
    \ program participants also receive cognitive behavioral therapies and employment,\
    \ transitional housing, and/or mental health services. In 2021, nearly 69 percent\
    \ of jail- and prison-based participants successfully completed all program requirements.\
    \ \n•\tContinue to promulgate the first national standards for prison and jail\
    \ substance use disorder treatment, Promising Practices Guidelines (PPG) for Residential\
    \ Substance Abuse Treatment. In 2019, BJA initiated a national program to assist\
    \ RSAT programs in meeting program standards, creating and piloting a fidelity\
    \ assessment in prison and jail RSAT programs in several states. In 2021, the\
    \ PPGs were updated and fidelity assessment interview was revised to include updated\
    \ research and program highlights. To date, fifty-one assessments have been completed\
    \ in twenty-two states with corresponding training and technical assistance (TTA)\
    \ recommendations to improve services in alignment with the PPGs. It is expected\
    \ that a fidelity assessment will have been conducted with at least one program\
    \ from each U.S. state and territory by the end of FY 2022. The efficacy of the\
    \ assistance will continue to be measured and adjusted as required in conjunction\
    \ with updates and revisions to the PPGs.    \n•\tIn previous fiscal years, the\
    \ RSAT TTA provider worked with prisons and jails to conduct on-site training\
    \ for correctional teams interested in replicating services of model programs.\
    \ Due to recent travel restrictions in fiscal years 2020 and 2021, the RSAT TTA\
    \ provider increased the number of virtual training webinars and online technical\
    \ assistance via teleconferencing, and developed a geo-map of RSAT programs linking\
    \ to a compendium of program descriptions highlighting RSAT-supported programs.\n\
    •\tContinue to champion the expansion of Medication-Assisted Treatment (MAT) as\
    \ an essential component of successful re-entry for inmates with alcohol and opioid\
    \ use disorders. Jails and prisons with model best practice programs have been\
    \ showcased through national webinars, onsite training sessions, and a national\
    \ meeting of prison, jail, and juvenile correctional practitioners across the\
    \ country.  In 2021, approximately 50 percent of all RSAT programs offered MAT\
    \ to offenders that were deemed eligible."
  year: '2021'
- description: "Please visit https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/department-justice-awards-more-300-million-fight-opioid-and-stimulant-crisis-and-address\n\
    \nThe RSAT Program accomplishments: \n•\tSupported the participation of approximately\
    \ 21,000 individuals in RSAT programs in FY 2021 with all receiving substance\
    \ use treatment services. Participants receiving residential services in jail\
    \ are suggested to remain in the program for a minimum of 3 months, while participants\
    \ in prison-based programs must remain in the program for a minimum of 6 months.\
    \ In addition to receiving treatment for substance use disorder treatment, many\
    \ program participants also receive cognitive behavioral therapies and employment,\
    \ transitional housing, and/or mental health services. In 2021, nearly 69 percent\
    \ of jail- and prison-based participants successfully completed all program requirements.\
    \ \n•\tContinue to promulgate the national standards for prison and jail substance\
    \ use disorder treatment, Promising Practices Guidelines (PPG) for Residential\
    \ Substance Use Treatment. In 2019, BJA initiated a national program to assist\
    \ RSAT programs in meeting program standards, creating and piloting a fidelity\
    \ assessment in prison and jail RSAT programs in several states. In 2021, the\
    \ PPGs were updated and fidelity assessment interview was revised to include updated\
    \ research and program highlights. To date, fifty-one fidelity assessments have\
    \ been completed in thirty seventwenty two states with corresponding training\
    \ and technical assistance (TTA) recommendations to improve services in alignment\
    \ with the PPGs. It is expected that a fidelity assessment will have been conducted\
    \ with at least one program from each U.S. state and territory by the end of FY\
    \ 2022. The efficacy of the assistance will continue to be measured and adjusted\
    \ as required in conjunction with updates and revisions to the PPGs.    \n•\t\
    In previous fiscal years, the RSAT TTA provider worked with prisons and jails\
    \ to conduct on-site training for correctional teams interested in replicating\
    \ services of model programs. Due to recent travel restrictions in fiscal years\
    \ 2020 and 2021, the RSAT TTA provider increased the number of virtual training\
    \ webinars and online technical assistance via tele-conferencing, and developed\
    \ a geo-map of RSAT programs linking to a compendium of program descriptions highlighting\
    \ RSAT-supported programs.\n•\tContinue to champion the expansion of Medication-Assisted\
    \ Treatment (MAT) as an essential component of successful re-entry for inmates\
    \ with alcohol and opioid use disorders. Jails and prisons with model best practice\
    \ programs have been showcased through national webinars, onsite training sessions,\
    \ and a national meeting of prison, jail, and juvenile correctional practitioners\
    \ across the country.  In 2021, approximately 50 percent of all RSAT programs\
    \ offered MAT to offenders that were deemed eligible."
  year: '2022'
rules_regulations: "Solicitation guidelines are posted on the Office of Justice Programs\
  \ web site at  http://www.ojp.gov/funding/solicitations.htm. \r\nFor additional\
  \ guidance reference the Department of Justice Grants Financial Guide   (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/financialguide/index.htm\
  \ ) and Post award Instructions (www.ojp.usdoj.gov/funding/pdfs/post_award_instructions.pdf).\
  \  Applicable OMB Circulars and Department of Justice regulations applicable to\
  \ specific types of grantees can be found in title 2 of the Code of Federal Regulations\
  \ (2 C.F.R.)."
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/d727d6724a0f46be8013501d9b1d6049/view
sub-agency: Office of Justice Programs
title: Residential Substance Abuse Treatment for State Prisoners
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=0badf0d2e691f3e2689c530dbd0277dd
---
