---
agency: Department of Transportation
applicant_types:
- Federal
- Federally Recognized lndian Tribal Governments
- Interstate
- Intrastate
- Local (includes State-designated lndian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- Other private institutions/organizations
- Other public institution/organization
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Small business (less than 500 employees)
- Sponsored organization
- State
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: The Infrastructure, Investment and Jobs (IIJA) Act (Public Law No. 117-53),
    signed into law on November 15, 2021, 49 U.S.C. Section 5314/IIJA Section 30017,
    Public Law 117-53, 49 US Code 5312.. Pub. L. 114, 94. 49 U.S.C. &sect; 5314.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/114/public/94
beneficiary_types:
- Local
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- State
categories:
- Employment, Labor, and Training - Planning, Research, and Demonstration
- Energy - Research and Development
- Environmental Quality - Research, Education, Training
- Regional Development - Planning and Technical Assistance
- Science and Technology - Research - Specialized
- Transportation - Urban Mass Transit
cfda: '20.531'
fiscal_year: '2023'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=20.531
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "The goals and objectives for Technical Assistance and Workforce Development\
  \ projects vary according to the type of project.  \nEligible activities include:\
  \ Technical assistance and Standards to more effectively and efficiently provide\
  \ public transportation service; administer funds received under 49 U.S.C. Chapter\
  \ 53 in compliance with federal law; and improve public transportation; address\
  \ Human Resources needs, provide Training; support Innovative Public Transportation\
  \ Frontline Workforce Development; and operate a National Transit Institute.\n\n\
  Technical Assistance can support compliance with the Americans with Disabilities\
  \ Act (ADA); compliance with human services transportation coordination requirements;\
  \ meeting the transportation needs of elderly individuals; increasing transit ridership\
  \ with Metropolitan Planning Organizations; addressing transportation equity; facilitating\
  \ best practices to promote bus driver safety; meeting the requirements 5323(j)\
  \ (Buy America) and 5323(m) (Pre and Post-Award Audits); assisting with the development\
  \ and deployment of low or no emission vehicles; and any other technical assistance\
  \ activities the Secretary of Transportation determines is necessary to advance\
  \ the interests of public transportation. \n\nStandards programs and projects include\
  \ developing voluntary and consensus-based standards and best practices by the public\
  \ transportation industry, including standards and best practices for safety, fare\
  \ collection, Intelligent Transportation Systems, accessibility, procurement, security,\
  \ asset management to maintain a state of good repair, operations, maintenance,\
  \ vehicle propulsion, communications, and vehicle electronics. \n\nHuman Resources\
  \ and Training programs may include: 1) Employment training programs; (2) Outreach\
  \ to specific under-represented populations in the workforce; (3) Research on public\
  \ transportation personnel and training needs; (4) Training and assistance for veteran\
  \ and minority business opportunities; and (5) Consensus-based national training\
  \ standards and certifications in partnership with industry stakeholders.\n\nThe\
  \ Innovative Public Transportation Frontline Workforce Development Program focuses\
  \ on: (1) developing apprenticeships, on-the job training, and instructional training\
  \ for public transportation maintenance and operations occupations; (2) building\
  \ local, regional, and statewide public transportation training partnerships with\
  \ local public transportation operators, labor union organizations, workforce development\
  \ boards, and State workforce agencies to identify and address workforce skill gaps;\
  \ (3) improving safety, security, and emergency preparedness in local public transportation\
  \ systems through improved safety culture and workforce communication with first\
  \ responders and the riding public; and (4) addressing current or projected workforce\
  \ shortages by developing partnerships with high schools, community colleges, and\
  \ other community organizations. \n\nThe National Transit Institute will develop\
  \ and conduct training and educational programs for Federal, State, and local transportation\
  \ employees, United States citizens and foreign nationals engaged or to be engaged\
  \ in public transportation work."
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":20243000.0,"usa_spending_actual":18432022.9},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":11580000.0,"usa_spending_actual":11216918.7},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":20661000.0,"usa_spending_actual":0.0}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":9983109.86,"obligation":17653022.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":437235.53,"obligation":3650000.0},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/20.531.html
popular_name: 5314 Program
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: 'In the Technical Assistance program FTA considered 16 applications
    for funding and approved up to 3 awards to grant in this area for the Fiscal Year
    2016.  Project activities  to be funded are: the National Aging and Disability
    Transportation Center, and the National Center for Mobility Management, as well
    as other essential standards and technical assistance projects in the safety,
    planning, and disadvantaged business areas.  The projects will allow FTA to continue
    to partner with experienced national nonprofit and other organizations to provide
    training and guidance on how to effectively implement transit programs and meet
    federal requirements.  Accomplishments for this section are included in CFDA 20.514. '
  year: '2016'
- description: Accomplishments data for this section are included in assistance listing
    20.514.
  year: '2017'
- description: "FUNDED PROJECTS ACCOMPLISHMENTS IN FY 2018 INCLUDE:  FTA funded activities\
    \ in Technical Assistance, Standards, Human Resources and Training.  Project/Program\
    \ accomplishments for FY 2018 include:  \n\n1)\tFTA funded the National Transit\
    \ Institute program which serves all of FTA funding programs in developing and\
    \ conducting training for federal, state, and local transportation employees and\
    \ others in a variety positions relevant to the transit industry.  NTI planned\
    \ to increase training course delivery by 1 percent and number of participants\
    \ trained; therefore, the goal was delivering 210 training courses to over 7,300\
    \ participants.   NTI training is conducted throughout the United States for all\
    \ transit properties and others to attend.     \n\n2)\tFTA funded the TRB Core\
    \ Program Support at the National Academy of Sciences; the goal was to increase\
    \ attendance annually and was achieved.  The program supports the exchange of\
    \ transit research information and results at the national level as well as technical\
    \ assistance for transit entities working at the state and local levels.  Research\
    \ results are made available to the transit industry through the TRB Annual Meeting\
    \ in January; which served over 13,600 people from 183 transit agencies.   \n\n\
    3)\tThe National Center for Mobility Management (NCMM) was being re-competed and\
    \ a notice of funding opportunity was released in the Summer of FY 2018.\n\n4)\t\
    FTA funded the National Aging and Disability Transportation Center (NADTC) project\
    \ to support the partnerships developed and created more technical centers for\
    \ targeted populations.\n \n5)\tFTA increased funding for safety standards, safety\
    \ technical assistance, and safety projects to provide transit agencies with promising\
    \ practices and volunteer standards that can increase worker and passenger safety."
  year: '2018'
- description: "ACCOMPLISHMENTS FOR PROJECTS FUNDED IN FY 2019 INCLUDE: FTA funded\
    \ projects: in Technical Assistance, Standards, and Training Projects.  \n\n1)\t\
    The National Transit Institute (NTI) served all of FTA programs by developing\
    \ and conducting training for federal, state, and local transportation employees\
    \ and others in a variety positions relevant to the transit industry.   NTI delivered\
    \ 272 training courses throughout the U.S. to 8,010 participants.  NTI conducted\
    \ five webinars promoting TCRP research products.  The average number of webinar\
    \ attendees was 148.  NTI's webinar on Battery Electric Buses-State of the practice\
    \ had 371 attendees, the most attendees of any webinar in FY 2019.  \n     \n\
    2)\tThe National Center for Mobility Management (NCMM) completed the last year\
    \ of its initial five-year agreement and began the initial year of its second\
    \ five-year agreement (NCMM II).  Activities achieved in FY 2019 include issuing\
    \ planning grants, holding webinars and information sharing sessions, developing\
    \ training, developing publicly available materials/guides, and providing technical\
    \ assistance. \n\n3)\tThe National Aging and Disability Transportation Center\
    \ (NADTC) activities achieved broad outreach in FY 2019.  Approximately 550 people\
    \ participated in NADTC online courses and webinars, and more than 1,400 attended\
    \ conference presentations given by NADTC staff from January to June 2019.  From\
    \ January to June 2019, there were more than 7,500 downloads of NADTC documents,\
    \ webinars, and other resources from the NADTC website. \n\n4)\tThe Transit Standards\
    \ Development Program conducted research and analysis in safety areas recommended\
    \ by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and provided a mechanism\
    \ for FTA to engage closely with stakeholders, standards development organizations,\
    \ and industry standards working groups.  The program produced internal reports\
    \ that help to guide and support FTA's safety program. \n\n5)   The Transit Standards\
    \ Development Program project worked with the American Public Transportation Association\
    \ to update 33 of 77 standards documents that help improve the performance, reliability,\
    \ efficiency, and safety of transit systems."
  year: '2019'
- description: "ACCOMPLISHMENTS DURING FY 2020.\n\nFTA funded various projects under\
    \ the Technical Assistance and Workforce Development in areas such as Technical\
    \ Assistance, Standards Development, Human Resources/Workforce, and Training.\
    \  Projects funded accomplishments during FY 2020 include:\n\n1).  The National\
    \ Transit Institute (NTI) delivered 170 training courses both on-site and virtually\
    \ to 6,459 participants. NTI witnessed a reduction of training courses delivered\
    \ and course participants in FY 2020 because of course cancellations due to the\
    \ COVID-19 pandemic.  NTI is now expanding its virtual course delivery capabilities,\
    \ online, and webinar-based portfolio.   \n\n2).  The National Aging and Disability\
    \ Transportation Center (NADTC), launched online courses, conducted webinars,\
    \ provided targeted technical assistance, published a newsletter, and developed\
    \ publicly available resources. Also, NADTC conducted a national survey of core\
    \ constituencies to identify transportation needs of older adults and people with\
    \ disabilities and provide grant assistance to local communities for implementation\
    \ of innovative transportation solutions and creating replicable models of excellence.\
    \ Approximately 847 people participated in NADTC online courses and webinars and\
    \ more than 390 attended conference presentations given by NADTC staff.  \n\n\
    3).  The National Center for Mobility Management (NCMM) accomplished the following\
    \ activities in FY 2020: held webinars and information sharing sessions, developed\
    \ e-learning training courses, developed publicly available materials/guides,\
    \ and provided technical assistance to public transit agencies through various\
    \ methods. It helped train mobility management practitioners on emerging service\
    \ models and new technologies that increase mobility and also supported the Coordinating\
    \ Council on Access and Mobility (CCAM). \n\n4).  The Transit Automation Technical\
    \ Assistance program produced an internal technical assistance needs assessment\
    \ findings document and developed a framework/scope for the Community of Practice\
    \ Initiative. Through this program, FTA has been developing a greater understanding\
    \ of the state of transit bus automation and the potential opportunities for transit\
    \ bus automation to improve safety and performance.\n\n5).  The Crime Prevention\
    \ and Public Safety Awareness program, a component of FTA’s Human Trafficking\
    \ Awareness and Public Safety Initiative, selected three organizations to receive\
    \ funding through cooperative agreements to develop and disseminate technical\
    \ assistance materials supporting public safety awareness campaigns that address\
    \ public safety in transit systems, including crime prevention, human trafficking,\
    \ and operator assault."
  year: '2020'
- description: "FY 2021 FUNDED ASSISTANCE LISTING ACCOMPLISHMENTS INCLUDE:  \n \n\
    FTA supports various types of projects under  Technical Assistance and Workforce\
    \ Development.  Projects in the areas Technical Assistance, Standards Development,\
    \ Human Resources/Workforce, and Training.    Accomplishments FUNDED in FY 2021\
    \ include:\n\n1) The National Transit Institute (NTI).  FTA funded the National\
    \ Transit Institute (NTI) and NTI delivered 162 training courses virtually to\
    \ 6,177 transit and transportation professionals. Between lockdowns, shut-downs,\
    \ quarantines, and closures, COVID-19 changed the way training is delivered. Even\
    \ though NTI experienced a sharp reduction in the delivery of training courses\
    \ compared to pre-COVID years, NTI quickly made drastic adjustments and successfully\
    \ delivered some training courses to the public transportation industry.  NTI\
    \ continues to expand its virtual course portfolio with plans to continue 100%\
    \ virtual course delivery until January 2022 and, potentially, resume a limited\
    \ scheduled of on-site course offerings soon after.  \n\n2) Transit Workforce\
    \ Center.  FTA announced a notice of funding opportunity and awarded the Transit\
    \ Workforce (TWC) in FY 2021.  The TWC has assisted over 20 transit agencies and\
    \ through their webinars reached several thousand people providing technical assistance\
    \ to address the critical transit workforce shortages.  \n \n3) TRB CORE Program.\
    \ FTA funded the Transportation Research Board (TRB) Core Program to support FTA\
    \ staff attendance at the TRB Annual Meeting and access to TRB reports and webinars.\
    \  This project provided FTA staff with access to all online TRB resources including\
    \ the Transportation Research International Documentation (TRID) database.  General\
    \ support for 175 TRB standing committees and TRB processes approximately 30,000\
    \ new transportation-related publications into TRID per year. \n\n4)  Transit\
    \ Survey Data Archiving and Analysis.  FTA funded the Transit Survey Data Archiving\
    \ and Analysis project to prevent valuable transportation datasets from becoming\
    \ lost or destroyed and to make these data available for legitimate research while\
    \ at the same time safeguarding survey participants privacy.  The project focused\
    \ on establishing a standardized workflow to convert transit survey databases\
    \ into the Transportation Secure Data Center (TSDC) and reconfiguring the TSDC\
    \ website and secure portal environment to provide navigable branches for accessing\
    \ transit survey data. Through this project, FTA will provide opportunities for\
    \ research and others with an interest in transit to better understand the characteristics\
    \ and travel patterns of the users of public transit.  \n\n5) The National Aging\
    \ and Disability Transportation Center (NADTC).   The National Aging and Disability\
    \ Transportation Center (NADTC) promoted the mobility of people with disabilities\
    \ and older adults, ensuring that public transportation supports independent living\
    \ in communities. NADTC completed a national diversity, equity and inclusion initiative;\
    \ conducted a coordination campaign including a national coordination committee;\
    \ provided online courses, webinars, and targeted technical assistance; hosted\
    \ a learning collaborative published a monthly newsletter and monthly blogs; actively\
    \ participated on social media; maintained an updated website; and developed useful\
    \ resources including an annual trends report. NADTS’s activities achieved broad\
    \ outreach.  Approximately 2,237 people."
  year: '2021'
- description: "ASSISTANCE LISTING ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF FUNDED PROJECTS IN FISCAL YEAR\
    \ (FY) 2022.  Accomplishments of funded projects in FY 2022 include:\n\n1) FTA\
    \ funded the Human Trafficking Awareness project having public safety officers\
    \ on transit buses part of the Crime Prevention and Public Safety Awareness Program.\
    \  The objective of having officers on board will help to identify and reduce\
    \ any instances of human trafficking, protect transit operators from risk of assault,\
    \ reduce crime on transit vehicles and at transit facilities, and improve rider\
    \ as well as public safety.  This effort is part of FTA’s Human Trafficking Awareness\
    \ and Public Safety Initiative. \n\n2) FTA funded the National Transit Institute\
    \ (NTI).  NTI transitioned 18 courses to a virtual platform.  NTI delivered 169\
    \ virtual training courses to 4,697 transit and transportation professionals.\n\
    \n3) FTA funded the Transportation Research Board (TRB) Core Program to support\
    \ FTA staff attendance at the TRB Annual Meeting and access to TRB reports and\
    \ webinars. This project included strong FTA staff attendance at the TRB Annual\
    \ Meeting and providing FTA staff with access to all online TRB resources, including\
    \ the Transportation Research International Documentation (TRID) database. Research\
    \ sponsors use TRID to avoid costly duplication and assure timely dissemination\
    \ of results. TRB processes approximately 30,000 new transportation-related publications\
    \ into TRID per year. FTA also sponsored the TRANSED accessibility, mobility,\
    \ and demand response international virtual conference.\n\n4) FTA successfully\
    \ entered into an agreement for the project Bus Exportable Power Systems (BEPS)\
    \ standards that enables public transportation agencies, communities, and States\
    \ to access resilient and flexible power options through hybrid electric bus fleet\
    \ vehicles during major power disruptions. FTA hosted a webinar on the Standard\
    \ Development for Bus Exportable Power Systems Notice of Funding Opportunity.\
    \ FTA announced the recipient selected for award.\n\n5) FTA funded the National\
    \ Center for Applied Transit Technology (N-CATT) and relevant activities in FY\
    \ 2022 include developing resources to help rural, small-urban, and tribal transit\
    \ providers understand the benefits of emerging technology and how to use the\
    \ technology in their own transit systems. The resources developed included reports,\
    \ training, online tools, podcasts, fact sheets, webinars, and in-person workshops.\
    \ N-CATT also provided direct technical assistance at the state and local levels\
    \ to help transit providers address transit technology issues."
  year: '2022'
- description: "ASSISTANCE LISTING ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF FUNDED PROJECTS DURING FISCAL\
    \ YEAR (FY) 2023.  \nAccomplishments of FTA funded projects in the Technical Assistance\
    \ and Workforce Development Program during FY 2023 include:\n\n1) In FY 2023,\
    \ National Transit Institute (NTI) achieved the following: 1) Delivered 169 virtual\
    \ training courses to 4,697 transit and transportation professionals; 2) Expanded\
    \ its virtual course offerings, planning to stay 100% virtual until January 2023,\
    \ with limited on-site sessions thereafter; 3) Established partnerships with key\
    \ organizations to support training at national and regional events, including\
    \ : AASHTO – Transit Management Winter Meeting; CTAA – Expo and SUN Conference;\
    \ COMTO – National Meeting and Training Conference; ENO – Transportation Senior\
    \ Executive Program; Latinos in Transit – Leadership Summit; Mpact Transit + Community\
    \ conference (formerly Rail ~Volution) – Annual Conference; NACTA – Designing\
    \ Cities Conference; National RTAP – National Conference; SWTA – Conference and\
    \ Expo; and WTS – International Conference. 4) Launched a new online “Host Request\
    \ Form” and revised management course, “Principles of Effective Management and\
    \ Supervision.” 5) Introduced the new “National Transit Database” course and piloted\
    \ the new “Environmental Justice for Transit Professionals” course. 6) Began issuing\
    \ digital certificates as of January 2023.\n\n2) FTA provided funds to continue\
    \ supporting National Aging and Disability Transportation Center (NADTC) to enhance\
    \ accessible transportation options. The funding enabled NADTC to provide technical\
    \ assistance to recipients of FTA’s grants, including Section 5310 and Innovative\
    \ Coordinated Access and Mobility funding. Additionally, NADTC developed training\
    \ sessions, webinars, and resources aimed at improving transportation accessibility\
    \ for older adults, people with disabilities and caregivers, ultimately increasing\
    \ awareness and availability of these crucial services.\n\n3) In FY 2023, the\
    \ project made significant progress in expanding transportation options for disadvantaged\
    \ populations. Key efforts included technical assistance and training to boost\
    \ mobility management and collaboration among stakeholders, led by the National\
    \ Center for Mobility Management (NCMM). Additional funding enabled critical resources\
    \ like a state-by-state Non-Emergency Medical Transportation (NEMT) directory,\
    \ access to the PolicyMap database, and expanded grant search tools for mobility\
    \ managers. These initiatives are expected to improve transportation coordination\
    \ and access for disadvantaged populations and support federally funded human\
    \ service agencies.\n\n4) In FY 2023, the Transit Standards Development project\
    \ made significant progress. A Transit Industry Needs Survey was created and distributed\
    \ to gather stakeholder input on key focus areas for new or updated standards.\
    \ The findings were analyzed in a Transit Industry Needs Report, highlighting\
    \ priority areas. After a thorough vetting, these areas were aligned with USDOT\
    \ and FTA goals and prioritized for action. The project is on track to produce\
    \ a Final List of Standards to Advance, with selected standards being developed\
    \ through existing standards programs. Expected outcomes include improved safety,\
    \ efficiency, and reliability for transit agencies and the communities they serve.\n\
    \n5) In FY 2023, the Transit Workforce Center (TWC) advanced its workforce support\
    \ by focusing on strategic planning, trend analysis, and peer collaboration. Key\
    \ initiatives included best practice sharing, peer learning forums, and training\
    \ for zero-emission bus transitions. TWC and FTA co-hosted listening sessions\
    \ to address workforce challenges, resulting in FTA’s National Workforce Development\
    \ Strategic Plan, with goals for recruitment, retention, and skill-building through\
    \ 2028. \n\nFrom October 2022 to June 2023, TWC reached nearly 3,800 participants,\
    \ managed 358 technical assistance requests, and launched a Transit Workforce\
    \ Data Dashboard. It also introduced the “Road to Zero Emissions Buses” initiative\
    \ and provided recruitment tools for agency workforce needs."
  year: '2023'
- description: "ASSISTANCE LISTING ACCOMPLISHMENTS - ACCOMPLISHMENTS OF PROJECTS FUNDED\
    \ IN FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2024.  Accomplishments of projects funded under the Technical\
    \ Assistance and Workforce Development Program in FY 2024 include: \n\n\n1) In\
    \ FY 2024, FTA funded the project Operation Lifesaver, Inc. (OLI’s), which provided\
    \ technical assistance and educational resources to support rail safety efforts\
    \ across 46 U.S. states and internationally. Through programs like the Transit\
    \ Safety Education Grants, OLI helped transit agencies develop and promote safety\
    \ best practices. It offered ten competitive subawards for transit safety projects\
    \ and a unique $10,000 grant for a creative initiative to encourage public participation\
    \ in OLI’s online transit safety pledges. OLI’s efforts helped raise public awareness,\
    \ prevent injuries and fatalities at rail crossings, and improve safety practices\
    \ within transit systems across the nation.\n\n2) In FY 2024, FTA funded the Transportation\
    \ Research Board (TRB) Core Program, supporting quarterly meetings, standing committees,\
    \ and access to TRB publications and research results. TRB facilitated expert\
    \ briefings, field visits, and conferences to strengthen ties with public transportation\
    \ agencies. FTA also received unlimited access to the TRB library and the Transportation\
    \ Research International Documentation (TRID) database for FTA, along with staff\
    \ liaison support. \nThe 2024 TRB Annual Meeting in Washington, DC, attracted\
    \ 13,691, close to the 2020 set record of 14,035. International attendance rose\
    \ to 16%, and all registrant categories increased from 2023.  \nIn Q1 2024, TRB\
    \ added 37 reports to TRID, introduced four new thesaurus terms, and launched\
    \ new Snap Searches. TRB also enhanced TRID and RIP databases with updates to\
    \ the Search History, a CSV export option, and a clear “Terms of Use” statement.\
    \ \n\n3) In FY 2024, FTA N-CATT project achieved the following during 2024: the\
    \ kick-off announcement of the Data Literacy Project at the 2024 CTAA Expo. On\
    \ June 11th, N-CATT hosted a Data Literacy Workshop during the expo to announce\
    \ the new initiative and discuss data literacy interests with local transit participants.\
    \ Over 80 attendees participated in the workshop, including TRI Associate Administrator,\
    \ who presented on behalf of the FTA. The workshop emphasized the importance of\
    \ local transit agency staff understanding and using data to manage their operations.\n\
    \n4) In FY 2024, FTA continued funding, which delivered 252 individual training\
    \ courses from 29 topic areas to 7,698 transit and transportation professionals.\
    \ NTI continued to expand and enhance course delivery, including both virtual\
    \ and in-person training. In response to the high demand for virtual training\
    \ opportunities, NTI’s virtual training continues to grow. NTI, in collaboration\
    \ with the Transit Workforce Development Technical Assistance Center (TWC), conducted\
    \ the first in-person Battery Electric Bus (BEB) Familiarization Course on May\
    \ 28 – 29, 2024. The two-day course provided participants with an overview of\
    \ BEB basics, the similarities and differences between standard internal combustion\
    \ engines and hybrid buses, safety guidelines and protocols, required personal\
    \ protective equipment (PPE), preventive maintenance practices, different BEB\
    \ charging technologies, and associated maintenance requirements. Lastly, NTI\
    \ Participated in over 35 industry events, including conferences, convenings,\
    \ summits, forums, workshops, and seminars for outreach purposes to learn about\
    \ the challenges and needs of the trends.\n\n5) In FY 2024, the TWC continued\
    \ advancing transit workforce development. Key accomplishments from October 2023\
    \ to July 2024, include: engaging over 2,820 participants through industry events;\
    \ resolving 258 targeted technical assistance requests, with 161 from transit\
    \ locations; and hosting 12 mentor training sessions through the ATTAIN Network,\
    \ delivering a women-in-apprenticeship webinar, and including apprenticeship topics\
    \ in 70+ presentations to industry groups. TWC maintained an online Resource Center\
    \ with 300+ resources and supported a recruitment toolkit with 2,101 views, offering\
    \ agencies customizable materials. The Transit Data Dashboard was updated, attracting\
    \ 2,517 views, and a webinar on workforce data was hosted. TWC also launched the\
    \ first Battery Electric Bus Familiarization course in St. Petersburg, FL, covering\
    \ essential technician training, and co-hosted a zero-emission bus resources webinar\
    \ attended by 248 participants. These initiatives reflect TWC’s commitment to\
    \ supporting and strengthening the transit workforce."
  year: '2024'
- description: "ASSISTANCE LISTING ACCOMPLISHMENTS - ANTICIPATED ACHIEVEMENTS OF PROJECTS\
    \ TO BE FUNDED FOR FISCAL YEAR (FY) 2025.\n\nAnticipated accomplishments of projects\
    \ for FY 2025 under the Technical Assistance and Workforce Development Program\
    \ include: \n\n1)  For FY 2025, FTA’s funding for the TRB Core Support Program\
    \ is expected to achieve the following: TRB will publish over 500 research papers\
    \ and reports on key transportation challenges and innovations. Ten new technical\
    \ resources, including toolkits and best practices, will be developed to guide\
    \ professionals in implementing solutions. The program will host 50 training events,\
    \ reaching 5,000 professionals globally. TRB will engage 100+ stakeholder organizations\
    \ through forums and collaborations to promote knowledge sharing. Additionally,\
    \ TRB will support pilot projects in 20 communities, fostering the adoption of\
    \ new technologies, and measure impact, aiming for a 20% increase in the use of\
    \ its findings by agencies. \n\n2) For FY 2025, FTA anticipates entering into\
    \ a five-year cooperative agreement with the selected awardee to establish the\
    \ new Coordinating Council on Access and Mobility (CCAM) National Technical Assistance\
    \ (TA) Center (CCAM TA Center) under the Technical Assistance and Workforce Development\
    \ Program.  The center will officially launch in FY 2025, with project activities\
    \ beginning shortly after the award announcement.\n\n3) For FY 2025, FTA anticipates\
    \ continuing funding NTI to conduct over 175 training sessions, reaching 5,800+\
    \ transit and transportation professionals nationwide. Complete the publication\
    \ of the revised “Zero-Emission Bus Transition Planning Guidebook” in partnership\
    \ with the Center for Transportation and the Environment. Redesign and launch\
    \ a new, vibrant, sleeker looking website. Revise the current “NTI Course Registrant\
    \ and Participant Code of Conduct” and retitle it to “NTI Course Registration\
    \ and Participation Policies.” \n\n4) For FY 2025, FTA plans to establish a cooperative\
    \ agreement with the selected awardee f the High School Public Transportation\
    \ Career project, with activities expected to begin soon after the award. \n\n\
    5) For FY 2025, FTA anticipates the recipient will create a virtual Innovation\
    \ Challenge Planning Guide and Toolkit based on Introducing Youth to American\
    \ Infrastructure, Inc. ( IYAI’s) 2023-2024 pilot. This guide will incorporate\
    \ feedback from participants, hosts, national judges, focusing on valuable content,\
    \ participation goals, and success metrics. The project will support the replicability\
    \ of youth-centered career awareness initiatives in local transit programs, addressing\
    \ workforce readiness challenges tied to an aging workforce. Aligned with USDOT’s\
    \ equity-focused Strategic Plan, the initiative targets youth aged 18-30, especially\
    \ from underrepresented groups, reframing public transit careers as pathways for\
    \ community engagement and growth. By building connections between youth and transit\
    \ agencies, this project seeks to broaden career awareness and foster professional\
    \ development, ultimately creating a more equitable workforce landscape."
  year: '2025'
rules_regulations: Most Federal transit laws are codified at Title 49, United States
  Code, Chapter 53 (49 U.S.C. chapter 53).  Authorizing legislation is substantive
  legislation enacted by Congress that establishes or continues the legal operation
  of a Federal program or agency.  FTA’s Fiscal Year Annual List of Certifications
  and Assurances for Federal Transit Administration Grants and Cooperative Agreements;
  FTA Circular 6100.1E for Research Projects; FTA Circular 4220.1F for Third-Party
  Contracting Guidance; and FTA Circular 5010.1E for Award Management Requirements.  In
  certain circumstances and in other fiscal years, contact the FTA Office of Research,
  Demonstration and Innovation as necessary.  Also, consult FTA website www.transit.dot.gov.  Other
  information will be made available upon request.
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/4056f8eea0164578b7085dc6ab437c92/view
sub-agency: Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
title: Technical Assistance and Workforce Development
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=52cfcfbabb35f6c5b320ae49f99e12e8
---
