---
agency: Environmental Protection Agency
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized lndian Tribal Governments
- Local (includes State-designated lndian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: Clean Water Act, 104(b)(3).
  url: null
- text: Clean Water Act, Section 320 & Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA).
    Pub. L. 117, 58.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/117/public/58
beneficiary_types: []
categories:
- Environmental Quality - Water Pollution Control
cfda: '66.123'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=66.123
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: 'Puget Sound has been designated as one of 28 estuaries of National Significance
  under section 320 of the Clean Water Act. The goal of the National Estuary Program
  is to attain and maintain water quality in designated estuaries that will assure
  protection of public water supplies and the protection and propagation of a balanced,
  indigenous population of shellfish, fish and wildlife and allows recreational activities
  in and on the water. The Puget Sound National Estuary Program''s approved Comprehensive
  Conservation and Management Plan (CCMP), the Action Agenda, has a goal to restore
  and maintain the Puget Sound Estuary''s environment by meeting 2022-2026 ecosystem
  targets. The Action Agenda for Puget Sound charts the course to recovery of our
  nation''s largest estuary–it complements and incorporates the work of many partners
  from around Puget Sound to describe regional strategies and specific actions needed
  to recover Puget Sound. These strategies and actions provide opportunities for federal,
  state, local, tribal, and private entities to better invest resources and coordinate
  actions. The EPA is committed to protecting and improving water quality and minimizing
  the adverse impacts of rapid development in the Puget Sound Basin. These commitments
  include protecting the watersheds and waters of Puget Sound by protecting the fundamental
  watershed processes that provide and create aquatic habitats and by reducing the
  generation and release of toxic, nutrient and pathogen pollution. This program has
  the following main objectives: First, implementing the approved CCMP, the Action
  Agenda for Puget Sound, is the primary objective of this program. Funds are directed
  to the highest priority work as articulated in every four-year updates to the Action
  Agenda work plan. The updated work plan identifies implementation strategies to
  achieve reductions in the harmful impacts on Puget Sound and restore previously
  damaged aquatic ecosystem functions. A central component of the approved CCMP for
  Puget Sound is its Science Work Plan which identifies some of the core scientific
  work that must be completed in order for Action Agenda implementation efforts to
  succeed. This program is to support implementation of priority near term actions
  and to support the technical studies and investigations that are needed to help
  direct implementation priorities and help support the tracking systems and evaluation
  approaches for implementation activities. Together with projects aimed at achievement
  of specific environmental outcomes, the science studies and technical investigations
  inform adaptive management of the program significantly contributing to the restoration
  and protection of Puget Sound. The program has considered relevant approaches to
  achieving the intended goals and objectives of the program consistent with statutory
  requirements, including priorities in Executive Order 14052 (Implementation of the
  Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act), to invest public dollars equitably, create
  jobs and high labor stands, ensure goods and services are made in America, and build
  infrastructure that is resilient and helps combat the climate crisis using IIJA
  funds. Funding Priorities - Fiscal Year 2021-2026 : Funding will be continued for
  the three strategic initiative leads (SILs) which will  focus on: Award and manage
  subawards to support the implementation of the Action Agenda with a focus on Implementation
  Strategies; maintain Strategic Initiative Advisory Teams (SIATs) to advise in investment-related
  decision-making; serve as Implementation Strategy Leads for Vital Signs related
  to the Strategic Initiative and form technical (e.g., Interdisciplinary Teams) and/or
  policy workgroups to develop, refine, adaptively manage, and operationalize Implementation
  Strategies; participate in the Puget Sound Partnership and National Estuary Program
  (NEP) Management Conference processes and work groups; and proactively coordinate
  with tribal partners and Local Integrating Organizations (LIOs) in order to accomplish
  SIL work. New lead programs have been created with Infrastructure Investment and
  Jobs Act (IIJA) funding.  In FY23 two new Request for Applications were issued for
  one lead organization for Climate Resilient Riparian Systems and the other for Ensuring
  Environmental Justice, Human Wellbeing and Ecosystem Recovery in Puget Sound.'
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":31666000.0,"usa_spending_actual":17503944.0},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":56585000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":43830741.0},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":26077000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":39010000.0}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0},{"x":"2023","outlay":182359.0,"obligation":15144685.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/66.123.html
popular_name: ''
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "No accomplishments to report with this year funding since the incremental\
    \ funding was awarded in late FFY2015.  See below for a few of the FFY2014-15\
    \ accomplishments under these Lead Organization Grants. \r\n\r\n\r\nPuget Sound\
    \ is a leader in estuary recovery. \r\n\r\nIC2 Alternatives Assessment Guide.\
    \ Seven states collaborated to produce the Interstate Chemicals Clearinghouse\
    \ (IC2) Alternatives Assessment Guide, a methodology to identify harmful toxins\
    \ in the manufacturing process and replace them with less harmful alternatives.\
    \ (Toxics and nutrients prevention, reduction and control) \r\n\r\n\r\nNW Green\
    \ Chemistry - Northwest Green Chemistry, established in large part through National\
    \ Estuary Program funding, offers technical assistance to Washington companies\
    \ interested in participating in the Safer Choice Program. The program helps consumers\
    \ and businesses find products that are safer for families, workplaces, communities\
    \ and the environment. In 2015, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)\
    \ \r\n\r\nnamed the Washington State Department of Ecology and Northwest Green\
    \ Chemistry as a Safer Choice Partner of the Year Award winner. (Toxics and nutrients\
    \ prevention, reduction and control) \r\n\r\n\r\nThe Puget Sound program has made\
    \ real and systemic changes that support sustainable efforts towards recovery.\
    \ \r\n\r\n&#9632; Integrated zoning and development mapping. To provide a common\
    \ foundation for land use planning decisions and facilitate cross-jurisdictional\
    \ planning, the Washington State Department of Commerce developed an integrated\
    \ map of zoning and development across Puget Sound. This map includes permitting\
    \ data which could be valuable for counties required to complete Building Lands\
    \ Reports. (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\r\n&#9632; Shoreline armoring\
    \ removal. Shoreline armoring is an important indicator of ecological conditions\
    \ in Puget Sound. By 2020, the goal is to remove more armoring than is added between\
    \ 2011 and 2020. The Washington State Department of Natural Resources is working\
    \ with local governments, non-governmental organizations and landowners to remove\
    \ seawalls, bulkheads and other artificial barriers between the water and the\
    \ land, helping restore Puget Sound shorelines and make beaches easier to access\
    \ for all. National Estuary Program funds are used to address armoring systemically,\
    \ combining direct work with homeowners with scientific advancements that address\
    \ armoring and on-the-ground armor removal and restoration. It is because of this\
    \ systemic approach that in 2014, for the first time, more armor was removed from\
    \ Puget Sound than was installed – a hopeful sign of things to come. (Marine and\
    \ nearshore protection and restoration; Watershed protection and restoration)\
    \ \r\n\r\n&#9632; No Discharge Zone. Fecal coliform in shellfish can cause illness\
    \ in humans. One source of fecal coliform in the Puget Sound is sewage discharge\
    \ from vessels. In order to protect public health, the Washington State Department\
    \ of Ecology researched a federal \"No Discharge Zone\" (NDZ) designation for\
    \ priority areas of Puget Sound. A draft NDZ agreement and petition were developed;\
    \ over 26,000 public comments were received on the draft petition. If approved\
    \ by the EPA, this would be the first NDZ in Washington State. (Pathogen prevention,\
    \ reduction and control) \r\n\r\n\r\n&#9632; Onsite Regional Funding Program.\
    \ There are more than a half million on-site sewage systems (OSS) in the Puget\
    \ Sound Region. These systems are a valuable part of the region's wastewater treatment\
    \ infrastructure. Like municipal wastewater treatment plants, OSS must be properly\
    \ built, operated and maintained to effectively treat sewage, thereby protecting\
    \ public health and water quality. Local health jurisdictions (LHJs) in the 12\
    \ Puget Sound counties implement comprehensive OSS management plans and enhanced\
    \ operation and maintenance (O&M) programs to help accomplish this. Steering and\
    \ Advisory Committees, made up of Washington Department of Health staff and representatives\
    \ from the 12 Puget Sound counties evaluated the funding needs, key issues and\
    \ optional funding mechanisms to develop strategic proposals to successfully establish\
    \ and fund the two OSS programs in the Puget Sound region. (Pathogen prevention,\
    \ reduction and control) \r\n\r\n\r\nFloodplains by Design. The Nature Conservancy's\
    \ multi-benefit floodplain restoration program, Floodplains by Design, has leveraged\
    \ $50 in capital projects for every National Estuary Program dollar invested.\
    \ (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\r\n\r\n&#9632; Floodplains by Design.\
    \ The Nature Conservancy's multi-benefit floodplain restoration program, Floodplains\
    \ by Design, has leveraged $50 in capital projects for every National Estuary\
    \ Program \r\n\r\ndollar invested. (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\
    \r\n\r\nNational Estuary Program projects are a smart investment, enabling Puget\
    \ Sound communities to leverage resources wisely and support critical work few\
    \ others will fund. \r\n\r\n&#9632; Progressive comprehensive plan updates. The\
    \ City of Duvall used National Estuary Program funds to complete a comprehensive\
    \ plan update. As a small city, the funding made it possible for the city to pursue\
    \ a more progressive update than is typical. They created watershed overlays to\
    \ help communicate resource needs to elected officials and the general public,\
    \ which encouraged development of regulations and incentive-based programs to\
    \ address those needs. (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\r\nInnovation\
    \ is innate to the Pacific Northwest, and Puget Sound recovery is no exception.\
    \ \r\n\r\n&#9632; Transfer of Development Rights: King County's Transfer of Development\
    \ Rights (TDR) program is only possible because of National Estuary Program funding.\
    \ The program prevents urban sprawl by transferring development rights away from\
    \ rural and resource lands to the county's Urban Areas. The Cities of Shoreline,\
    \ Mountlake Terrace, Tukwila and Tacoma are now completing feasibility studies\
    \ for TDR and may soon negotiate an interlocal agreement with their respective\
    \ counties. (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\r\n&#9632; New ecosystem\
    \ services markets: Ecosystem services markets are still a relatively new idea.\
    \ The development of some markets has fallen short because outside organizations\
    \ were not ready to approve a grant recipient's work. The Nisqually Tribe and\
    \ City of Olympia continue to work collaboratively to develop an ecosystem services\
    \ market to purchase development rights and build a community forest to protect\
    \ part of Olympia's aquifer. (Watershed protection and restoration) \r\n\r\n&#9632;\
    \ New scientific tools to inform decisions: The innovative High Resolution Change\
    \ Detection project uses interactive aerial maps to show site-level changes in\
    \ land cover over time. The map's analytics provide information about why the\
    \ land cover changed and measure the rate of change relative to Puget Sound Vital\
    \ Signs, both of which can be used to track Action Agenda progress. (Watershed\
    \ protection and restoration) \r\n\r\n\r\nFuture success will be amplified by\
    \ the capacity and social capital being built today.\r\n\r\n&#9632; Hood Canal\
    \ Regional PIC Program: In Hood Canal, shellfish beds are hard-hit by multiple\
    \ sources of pollution. Kitsap County has an exemplary record of addressing Pollution\
    \ Identification and Control (PIC) issues, and is now partnered with (and helping\
    \ mentor) Mason and Jefferson Counties and the Port Gamble S'Klallam and Skokomish\
    \ Tribes to reduce pollution inputs to Hood Canal's shellfish beds. This effort\
    \ is part of the Department of Health's PIC program, which is active in all 12\
    \ counties around Puget Sound and promotes collaborative efforts to identify and\
    \ reduce the amount of pollution reaching shellfish beds. (Pathogen prevention,\
    \ reduction and control) \r\n\r\n&#9632; Facilitating the use of best practices:\
    \ Several Lead Organizations have provided technical assistance and mentorship\
    \ around the region, and developed resources to expand the reach of this support:\
    \ \r\n\r\n&#61607;&#61472;The Marine Shoreline Design Guidelines help identify\
    \ the shoreline type that best suits conditions at a site \r\n\r\n&#61607;&#61472;A\
    \ Pollution Identification and Correction Program Guidance to find, correct and\
    \ prevent pollutants from entering Puget Sound \r\n\r\n&#61607;&#61472;IC2 Alternatives\
    \ Assessment Guide to replace harmful chemicals in the manufacturing process \r\
    \n\r\n&#61607;&#61472;A K-12 curriculum on ocean acidification \r\n\r\n&#61607;&#61472;The\
    \ Northwest Straits Foundation held workshops for landowners, trained volunteers\
    \ and provided free technical assistance to reduce shoreline armoring \r\n\r\n\
    &#61607;&#61472;The Department of Ecology certified over 50 landscape professionals\
    \ in best management practices to reduce toxic and nutrient loading from pesticides\
    \ and fertilizers\r\n"
  year: '2015'
- description: No accomplishments to report with this year funding since the incremental
    funding was awarded in late FFY2015.
  year: '2016'
- description: Nearly 1,000 acres of harvestable shellfish beds have been reopened
    since January 2017. 760 acres of commercial shellfish beds have been upgraded
    in Liberty Bay. Kitsap County teamed up with local stakeholders to apply progressive
    pollution identification and correction strategies. 129 acres of Birth Bay in
    Whatcom County have been upgraded to allow year-round shellfish harvest by both
    recreational and commercial fishers. From 2007 through January 2018 a total of
    11, 318 acres were upgraded and 6,298 acres were downgraded for a net total of
    5,020 acres of improvement. Pollution and Identification and Correction (PIC)
    programs help counties respond to downgrades by forming shellfish protection districts
    and developing closure response plans to identify and correct pollution sources
    in areas with declining water quality. The counties’ Local Health jurisdictions
    have been able to change landowner behavior using incentives like rebates for
    inspections, pump outs, and installation of risers. Farm incentives are being
    used to install best management practices such as fencing, gutters, and covered
    manure storage. 2,578 acres of habitat have been restored or permanently protected.
    In Snohomish county 27 shoreline restoration program are completed – helping to
    restore 2,200 linear feet of shoreline. Also, many lake landowners have participated
    in the LakeWise program (lawn or septic care workshop and/or site visit). This
    program can reduce nutrient pollution at threatened lakes through actions of the
    residents, Starter package content for the Toxics in Fish report is complete and
    delivered. Since 2017 the program has made significant progress in implementing
    a new and improved funding model, finalizing four additional implementation strategies
    for the Floodplains, Land Development and Cover, Chinook Salmon, and Shoreline
    Armoring vital signs. A template for Implementation Strategy fact sheets was developed.
    A Draft Implementation Strategy Communication Strategy was completed and updated
    as a living document. Update of economic vital sign indicators. The 2017 State
    of the Sound report was completed and published online in November 2017, on schedule.
    The substantially redesigned 2017 State of the Sound report, was recently nominated
    for the National Conference of State Legislatures’ 2018 Notable Document Award
  year: '2017'
- description: 'Habitat Strategic Initiative • 1,500 feet of shoreline armor removed
    including 630.8 tons of large angular rock and 263.87 tons of concrete bags removed
    • Two key guidance documents: Sea Level Rise Considerations for Nearshore Restoration
    Projects in Puget Sound and Guidelines for Mapping Sea Level Rise Inundation in
    Washington State (Planning for Sea Level Rise in Puget Sound, • Action Agenda
    Near Term Action (NTA) review: planned and executed “NTA camp” for the review
    of 635 NTAs with 70-volunteer technical reviewers • Leading the Incentivizing
    Healthy Shorelines workshop & supporting the development of Ecosystem Coordination
    Board policy recommendations Shellfish Strategic Initiative • Since April 2017,
    The Kitsap Conservation District has written 5 farm plans, provided technical
    assistance to 65 landowners, and implemented 41 BMPs- all using EPA Puget Sound
    funds. • The Washington Department of Health recently announced it is reclassifying
    236 acres from Prohibited to Approved for shellfish harvest in Miller Bay Kitsap
    County, Washington. • The Kitsap Pollution Identification and Correction (PIC)
    program finds and fixes sources of fecal pollution. • In Skagit County, 87% of
    the OSS in the Marine Recovery Area are now current on their inspections. Since
    2016, Skagit Public Health has mailed out onsite sewage system reminder letters
    to property owners every year. Generally, more frequent inspections mean that
    minor problems are fixed earlier, preventing failure. • Skagit''s Pollution Identification
    and Correction (PIC) program runs a fun and informative "PoopSmart" social marketing
    campaign. Comparing the pre-years of April 2016-2017 to post-years of April 2018-2019,
    OSS maintenance is up a whopping 48%. (274 in 2016-2017, 407 in 2018-2019). •
    Skagit''s Pollution Identification and Correction (PIC) program also uses innovative
    methods to find and fix sources of fecal pollution, such as "Crush" the sewage
    sniffing dog, and a new EPA-funded chemical tracer study. • In Samish Bay, which
    at 4,000 acres is the largest commercial shellfish growing area in Washington
    state, and is critical to reaching the Puget Sound target of 10,800 acres net
    improvement. • Water quality has improved enough that Department of Health has
    removed the spring critical period as the period of evaluation for an upgrade.
    • Bacteria levels in the Samish River watershed have been reduced by 60% since
    2011. Bay View State Park''s swim beach, which was closed for a third of the swimming
    season due to bacterial pollution in 2015, was open and clean all summer last
    year. • The number of days that commercial shellfish beds are closed in spring
    due to pollution have been reduced by 60% since 2014. • The Washington Department
    of Health (DOH) completed the evaluation of water quality data from the 800-acre
    Portage Bay Shellfish Growing Area and Nooksack River and determined that the
    spring closure for the area can be removed. (Data indicates that water quality
    issues continue to persist during the fall closure period.) • While water quality
    is not quite good enough to upgrade the overall classification of the growing
    area, Lummi tribal members will now be able to harvest from Portage Bay during
    the spring and the removal of the spring closure period shows the success of the
    watershed-wide pollution identification and correction programs. DOH will continue
    to work with Whatcom County, the Lummi Nation, and other area stakeholders to
    find and fix pollution sources. • The Washington State Department of Health (DOH)
    announced that portions of commercial shellfish areas around 20 Puget Sound marinas
    would no longer be classified as prohibited. • Improved vessel sewage management
    has allowed DOH to remove shellfish harvest restrictions on nearly 700 acres of
    commercial shellfish beds in 8 Puget Sound counties. • Over the past 20 years,
    progress has been made to reduce the potential for sewage discharge from boats,
    and this includes better waste-holding capacity in most boats, increased boat
    waste pump out stations, and the implementation of a No Discharge Zone throughout
    the Puget Sound. The improvements have led to better water quality, a lowered
    illness risk to people who eat shellfish, and greater protection of public health.
    EPA Puget Sound funding has contributed to outreach and education for vessel owners.
    • Stormwater Strategic Initiative • The University of Washington Tacoma''s "Stormwater
    Chemical Characterization and Watershed Prioritization" surveyed stormwater in
    Puget Sound creeks to identify sources, watersheds, and time periods that are
    responsible for disproportionate water quality degradation and should be prioritized
    for restoration or stormwater treatment efforts. UW Center for Urban Waters researchers
    collected >140 water samples in 15 Puget Sound creeks during storm events in Fall
    2017 – Spring 2019. Using advanced chemical analyses, they: 1) prioritized regional
    watersheds most impacted by urban runoff, 2) identified chemical indicators for
    urbanization and biological degradation, and 3) characterized "pollutographs"
    relative to storm hydrographs, to measure and prioritize contaminant flows in
    urban creeks affected by stormwater pollution. In collaboration with Miller Creek
    Basin (Cities of Burien, Normandy Park, and SeaTac; Port of Seattle; King County)
    partners, they sampled along the watershed to identify key contaminant inputs
    and polluted reaches of the creek. Findings will guide efforts to treat urban
    stormwater and improve water quality for coho salmon based on these findings.
    Several recent journal publications were informed by this NEP-funded research,
    including "Using High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry to Identify Organic Contaminants
    Linked to Urban Stormwater Mortality Syndrome in Coho Salmon" in Environmental
    Science and Technology. This publication indicated that tire wear particle leachates
    contribute to coho pre-spawn mortality. • A major deliverable under the Stormwater
    Strategic Initiative is an implementation strategy to reduce toxics in Puget Sound
    fish, including Chinook salmon. This grant’s Toxics in Fish/ Southern Resident
    Killer Whale work played a significant role in Washington Department of Ecology
    state budget development processes, and has catalyzed several legislative changes--including
    the passage of new legislation giving the Department of Ecology new authority
    to manage toxics identified through the Toxics in Fish / Southern Resident Killer
    Whale process. It has also led to significant new proposed investments in areas
    critical to Toxics in Fish and Southern Resident Killer Whale recovery. It has
    also created impetus to solve some Toxics in Fish challenges, such as prioritizing
    contaminants of emerging concern--a key critical process step identified in the
    strategy. Even though this Toxics in Fish implementation strategy is still a ''draft''
    product and short of full completion, Department of Ecology has already been able
    to use it to great effect. Base+ Award 1. To promote financial management and
    financial sustainability the Partnership initiated a project management process
    to more effectively manage program, project and staffing resources. 2. To promote
    alignment of local and regional priorities and actions over 600 Near Term Actions
    (NTA) were evaluated for alignment with the Leadership Council adopted slate of
    regional priorities at a successful NTA review “camp”; an excellent example of
    collaboration across the Puget Sound recovery system with over 80 participants.
    3. To document the status of recovery in Puget Sound the Partnership published
    the 2017 State of the Sound Report. The report combines a response to statutory
    questions about the management and funding of Puget Sound recovery, with information
    on ecosystem status and trends. Unlike previous reports, the 2017 report provides
    a summary of the progress on the Vital Sign indicators with more detailed indicator
    information available on an updated Vital Signs website. The Vital Signs website
    was updated with Vital Sign-level reports and messaging from PSEMP workgroups
    for 12 of 25 Vital Signs as of October 2017. Over 1,500 reports (and a larger
    number of executive summary 2-pagers) have been distributed to partners, significantly
    more than for previous reports. Also notable in the 2017 report are four locally
    based recovery stories about seawalls, shellfish, floodplains and stormwater pollution.
    The stories are designed to be visually engaging with extensive use of graphics
    to help tell the story. The report also contains a list of 17 recommendations
    (also included in the Executive Summary) that indicate the increased commitment
    needed from partners to advance recovery. The Partnership has also communicated
    the report''s findings to multiple audiences around Puget Sound through presentations
    and webinars. The redesigned Vital Signs Design report was nominated for the national
    conference of State Legislatures’ 2018 Notable Document Award. The Vital Signs
    design was called out as a best practice by the Indian River Lagoon Council and
    the National Estuary Program. 4. To provide professional development opportunities
    Partnership staff engaged in the 2018 Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference that was
    successfully convened in Seattle. The theme of the conference was “Ecosystem Recovery
    in an International Transboundary System” with presentations spanning a range
    of topics. The Partnership’s Science and Evaluation Director was co-chair of the
    2018 conference. Thirty staff participated in the event with four serving as session
    presenters and/or facilitators. 5. To promote strategic regional engagements the
    Partnership continued forging connections with entities such as the Northwest
    Seaport Alliance and the Boeing Company. An outcome of meeting with the former
    is support for state legislative priorities of the Partnership. 6. To promote
    engagement and involvement in ecosystem recovery, six of the seven Marine Resources
    Committees (MRC) affiliated with the Northwest Straits Commission engage volunteers
    in a variety of stewardship and training events. For example, through Salish Sea
    Stewards, 61 Skagit county residents received citizen science training. The Clallam
    County MRC cooperates with the city of Port Angeles to provide oil spill preparedness
    training. During this reporting period 33 volunteers received the HAZWOPER certification.
    MRCs host symposiums as well. Over 100 people attended a symposium hosted by the
    San Juan MRC on the plight of the southern resident killer whales, while the Whatcom
    MRC co-hosted a water supply symposium with over 130 participants. Implementation
    Strategies/Science Award 1. To improve awareness and understanding, the Puget
    Sound Institute publishes newsletters and magazine articles and covers special
    events like the 2018 Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference. 2. To enhance Implementation
    Strategies (IS) through social science Effectiveness and Social Science Protocols
    have either been drafted and are ready for incorporation or have enough content
    to be considered well-formed enough to be included as Guidance for future IS development.
    Additional Social Science concepts and information are being integrated into the
    Toxics in Fish and Marine Water Quality implementation strategy process as content
    is being created by the interdisciplinary team (IDTs). 3. To support the Science
    Panel’s role in Implementation Strategies, guidelines and terms of reference for
    external review of shoreline armoring were prepared for review of the Shoreline
    Armoring Implementation Strategy. The Guidelines and TOR for Shoreline Armoring
    IS was developed to be applicable to other ISs with minimal change. 4. To bridge
    between the Puget Sound scientific community and the Management Conference, staff
    presented as follows: July 2018 meetings: discussion of nutrient forum and marine
    water quality IS at SP meeting; discussion of Shore Armoring at ECB meeting. Convened
    science-policy workshop on December 12, 2017 - science panel invited all leadership
    council members, leaders of ECB and salmon recovery council and others (e.g.,
    SI Lead staff) to discuss resilience framing of Puget Sound ecosystem recovery.
    5. Staff have participated in the national coastal and estuaries meeting (CERF)
    in November 2017. Staff presented a session on What’s Working to Restore Puget
    Sound? Making Decisions Based on Outcomes. Partnership, participated in the 2018
    Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference, presented on framework for Puget Sound ecosystem
    recovery framework at conference of National Association of Environmental Professionals
    (NAEP), and staff were part of a panel presentation on Puget Sound at the National
    Conference on Ecosystem Restoration.'
  year: '2018'
- description: 'Habitat Strategic Initiative • 1,500 feet of shoreline armor removed
    including 630.8 tons of large angular rock and 263.87 tons of concrete bags removed
    • Two key guidance documents: Sea Level Rise Considerations for Nearshore Restoration
    Projects in Puget Sound and Guidelines for Mapping Sea Level Rise Inundation in
    Washington State (Planning for Sea Level Rise in Puget Sound, • Action Agenda
    Near Term Action (NTA) review: planned and executed “NTA camp” for the review
    of 635 NTAs with 70-volunteer technical reviewers • Leading the Incentivizing
    Healthy Shorelines workshop & supporting the development of Ecosystem Coordination
    Board policy recommendations Shellfish Strategic Initiative • Since April 2017,
    The Kitsap Conservation District has written 5 farm plans, provided technical
    assistance to 65 landowners, and implemented 41 BMPs- all using EPA Puget Sound
    funds. • The Washington Department of Health recently announced it is reclassifying
    236 acres from Prohibited to Approved for shellfish harvest in Miller Bay Kitsap
    County, Washington. •  In Samish Bay, which at 4,000 acres is the largest commercial
    shellfish growing area in Washington state, and is critical to reaching the Puget
    Sound target of 10,800 acres net improvement. • Water quality has improved enough
    that Department of Health has removed the spring critical period as the period
    of evaluation for an upgrade. • Bacteria levels in the Samish River watershed
    have been reduced by 60% since 2011. Bay View State Park''s swim beach, which
    was closed for a third of the swimming season due to bacterial pollution in 2015,
    was open and clean all summer last year. • The number of days that commercial
    shellfish beds are closed in spring due to pollution have been reduced by 60%
    since 2014. • The Washington Department of Health (DOH) completed the evaluation
    of water quality data from the 800-acre Portage Bay Shellfish Growing Area and
    Nooksack River and determined that the spring closure for the area can be removed.
    (Data indicates that water quality issues continue to persist during the fall
    closure period.) • While water quality is not quite good enough to upgrade the
    overall classification of the growing area, Lummi tribal members will now be able
    to harvest from Portage Bay during the spring and the removal of the spring closure
    period shows the success of the watershed-wide pollution identification and correction
    programs. DOH will continue to work with Whatcom County, the Lummi Nation, and
    other area stakeholders to find and fix pollution sources. • The Washington State
    Department of Health (DOH) announced that portions of commercial shellfish areas
    around 20 Puget Sound marinas would no longer be classified as prohibited. • Improved
    vessel sewage management has allowed DOH to remove shellfish harvest restrictions
    on nearly 700 acres of commercial shellfish beds in 8 Puget Sound counties. •
    Over the past 20 years, progress has been made to reduce the potential for sewage
    discharge from boats, and this includes better waste-holding capacity in most
    boats, increased boat waste pump out stations, and the implementation of a No
    Discharge Zone throughout the Puget Sound. The improvements have led to better
    water quality, a lowered illness risk to people who eat shellfish, and greater
    protection of public health. EPA Puget Sound funding has contributed to outreach
    and education for vessel owners. • Stormwater Strategic Initiative • The University
    of Washington Tacoma''s "Stormwater Chemical Characterization and Watershed Prioritization"
    surveyed stormwater in Puget Sound creeks to identify sources, watersheds, and
    time periods that are responsible for disproportionate water quality degradation
    and should be prioritized for restoration or stormwater treatment efforts. UW
    Center for Urban Waters researchers collected >140 water samples in 15 Puget Sound
    creeks during storm events in Fall 2017 – Spring 2019. Using advanced chemical
    analyses, they: 1) prioritized regional watersheds most impacted by urban runoff,
    2) identified chemical indicators for urbanization and biological degradation,
    and 3) characterized "pollutographs" relative to storm hydrographs, to measure
    and prioritize contaminant flows in urban creeks affected by stormwater pollution.
    In collaboration with Miller Creek Basin (Cities of Burien, Normandy Park, and
    SeaTac; Port of Seattle; King County) partners, they sampled along the watershed
    to identify key contaminant inputs and polluted reaches of the creek. Findings
    will guide efforts to treat urban stormwater and improve water quality for coho
    salmon based on these findings. Several recent journal publications were informed
    by this NEP-funded research, including "Using High-Resolution Mass Spectrometry
    to Identify Organic Contaminants Linked to Urban Stormwater Mortality Syndrome
    in Coho Salmon" in Environmental Science and Technology. This publication indicated
    that tire wear particle leachates contribute to coho pre-spawn mortality. • A
    major deliverable under the Stormwater Strategic Initiative is an implementation
    strategy to reduce toxics in Puget Sound fish, including Chinook salmon. This
    grant’s Toxics in Fish/ Southern Resident Killer Whale work played a significant
    role in Washington Department of Ecology state budget development processes, and
    has catalyzed several legislative changes--including the passage of new legislation
    giving the Department of Ecology new authority to manage toxics identified through
    the Toxics in Fish / Southern Resident Killer Whale process. It has also led to
    significant new proposed investments in areas critical to Toxics in Fish and Southern
    Resident Killer Whale recovery. It has also created impetus to solve some Toxics
    in Fish challenges, such as prioritizing contaminants of emerging concern--a key
    critical process step identified in the strategy. Even though this Toxics in Fish
    implementation strategy is still a ''draft'' product and short of full completion,
    Department of Ecology has already been able to use it to great effect. Base+ Award
    1. To promote financial management and financial sustainability the Partnership
    initiated a project management process to more effectively manage program, project
    and staffing resources. 2. To promote alignment of local and regional priorities
    and actions over 600 Near Term Actions (NTA) were evaluated for alignment with
    the Leadership Council adopted slate of regional priorities at a successful NTA
    review “camp”; an excellent example of collaboration across the Puget Sound recovery
    system with over 80 participants. 3. To document the status of recovery in Puget
    Sound the Partnership published the 2017 State of the Sound Report. The report
    combines a response to statutory questions about the management and funding of
    Puget Sound recovery, with information on ecosystem status and trends. Unlike
    previous reports, the 2017 report provides a summary of the progress on the Vital
    Sign indicators with more detailed indicator information available on an updated
    Vital Signs website. The Vital Signs website was updated with Vital Sign-level
    reports and messaging from PSEMP workgroups for 12 of 25 Vital Signs as of October
    2017. Over 1,500 reports (and a larger number of executive summary 2-pagers) have
    been distributed to partners, significantly more than for previous reports. Also
    notable in the 2017 report are four locally based recovery stories about seawalls,
    shellfish, floodplains and stormwater pollution. The stories are designed to be
    visually engaging with extensive use of graphics to help tell the story. The report
    also contains a list of 17 recommendations (also included in the Executive Summary)
    that indicate the increased commitment needed from partners to advance recovery.
    The Partnership has also communicated the report''s findings to multiple audiences
    around Puget Sound through presentations and webinars. The redesigned Vital Signs
    Design report was nominated for the national conference of State Legislatures’
    2018 Notable Document Award. The Vital Signs design was called out as a best practice
    by the Indian River Lagoon Council and the National Estuary Program. 4. To provide
    professional development opportunities Partnership staff engaged in the 2018 Salish
    Sea Ecosystem Conference that was successfully convened in Seattle. The theme
    of the conference was “Ecosystem Recovery in an International Transboundary System”
    with presentations spanning a range of topics. The Partnership’s Science and Evaluation
    Director was co-chair of the 2018 conference. Thirty staff participated in the
    event with four serving as session presenters and/or facilitators. 5. To promote
    strategic regional engagements the Partnership continued forging connections with
    entities such as the Northwest Seaport Alliance and the Boeing Company. An outcome
    of meeting with the former is support for state legislative priorities of the
    Partnership. 6. To promote engagement and involvement in ecosystem recovery, six
    of the seven Marine Resources Committees (MRC) affiliated with the Northwest Straits
    Commission engage volunteers in a variety of stewardship and training events.
    For example, through Salish Sea Stewards, 61 Skagit county residents received
    citizen science training. The Clallam County MRC cooperates with the city of Port
    Angeles to provide oil spill preparedness training. During this reporting period
    33 volunteers received the HAZWOPER certification. MRCs host symposiums as well.
    Over 100 people attended a symposium hosted by the San Juan MRC on the plight
    of the southern resident killer whales, while the Whatcom MRC co-hosted a water
    supply symposium with over 130 participants. Implementation Strategies/Science
    Award 1. To improve awareness and understanding, the Puget Sound Institute publishes
    newsletters and magazine articles and covers special events like the 2018 Salish
    Sea Ecosystem Conference. 2. To enhance Implementation Strategies (IS) through
    social science Effectiveness and Social Science Protocols have either been drafted
    and are ready for incorporation or have enough content to be considered well-formed
    enough to be included as Guidance for future IS development. Additional Social
    Science concepts and information are being integrated into the Toxics in Fish
    and Marine Water Quality implementation strategy process as content is being created
    by the interdisciplinary team (IDTs). 3. To support the Science Panel’s role in
    Implementation Strategies, guidelines and terms of reference for external review
    of shoreline armoring were prepared for review of the Shoreline Armoring Implementation
    Strategy. The Guidelines and TOR for Shoreline Armoring IS was developed to be
    applicable to other ISs with minimal change. 4. To bridge between the Puget Sound
    scientific community and the Management Conference, staff presented as follows:
    July 2018 meetings: discussion of nutrient forum and marine water quality IS at
    SP meeting; discussion of Shore Armoring at ECB meeting.'
  year: '2019'
- description: "The list of accomplishments under this assistance listing include,\
    \ but are not limited to, the following:   The Puget Sound Leadership Council\
    \ approving the 2022-2026 Action Agenda.  The 2022-2026 Action Agenda charts the\
    \ course for Puget Sound recovery as our community's shared plan for advancing\
    \ protection and restoration efforts across the region. The 2022-2026 Action Agenda\
    \ is informed by science and guides effective investment in Puget Sound protection\
    \ and restoration. This Action Agenda update improves over past versions by increasing\
    \ the focus on what is needed to recover Puget Sound, based on an assessment of\
    \ Puget Sound Vital Signs with partners. The Habitat Implementation Strategies\
    \ (HSIL) Update Workplan for 2020-2021 was successfully developed and includes\
    \ an update of each Implementation Strategy narrative. The HSIL Communications\
    \ Lead continues to provide leadership to the SIL communication subcommittee and\
    \ oversaw the roll-out of the HSIL Implementation Strategy Landing pages and continues\
    \ to coordinate the overall website update. Several subawardees are successfully\
    \ engaging in the Management Conference.  A mapping product has been developed\
    \ focusing on Sea Level Rise Vulnerability and is now being shared with Local\
    \ Integrating Organizations. The MART grant was successfully closed out and lessons\
    \ learned will be shared through the Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference and other\
    \ forums. HSIL staff provided leadership and technical website expertise to the\
    \ Cross-SIL communications group. They have led a major update of the SIL website\
    \ which will improve our ability to communicate outcomes of HSIL 1.0 investments\
    \ in the context of the Implementation Strategies. PSI work is underway on the\
    \ HSIL 1.0 synthesis which will be an important component of adaptive management\
    \ and synthesis from HSIL 1.0. From wastewater management, pollution identification\
    \ and correction program support, agricultural best management practices, marine\
    \ water and shoreline monitoring, policy and addressing climate change, the shellfish\
    \ strategic initiative lead (SIL) brings together a diverse range of knowledge\
    \ and expertise- all working together towards the shared goal of protecting public\
    \ health and a healthy Puget Sound. The program coordinates with partners at different\
    \ state agencies and is supported by the Shellfish Strategic Initiative Advisory\
    \ Team (SIAT). The SIAT has advised the SIL since 2016, lending their expertise\
    \ and advice on which projects and programs to fund, important shellfish recovery\
    \ questions to address, and input on the Shellfish Beds Implementation Strategy,\
    \ the roadmap to addressing harvestable shellfish bed recovery. Serving as the\
    \ Shellfish Implementation Strategy Lead and working to operationalize the Shellfish\
    \ IS and work towards achieving the Shellfish Vital Sign Target. See https://pugetsoundestuary.wa.gov/shellfish-beds/\
    \ for a summary of that work. Subawards funded by the Shellfish SIL listed at\
    \ https://pugetsoundestuary.wa.gov/shellfish-strategic-initiative/. Fact Sheets\
    \ for Shellfish SIL funded subawards are available at: https://pugetsoundestuary.wa.gov/funded-projects/\
    \ The Stormwater Team funds diverse projects—research, green infrastructure, decision\
    \ support tools, and collaborative approach pilots, among others, and uses its\
    \ water quality Implementation Strategies - the Benthic Index of Biotic Integrity,\
    \ Toxics in Fish and Marine Water Quality - to identify opportunities, strategic\
    \ invention points and communities of practice for implementation. https://pugetsoundestuary.wa.gov/stormwater-strategic-initiative/\
    \ . Fact Sheets for Stormwater SIL funded subawards are available at: https://pugetsoundestuary.wa.gov/funded-projects/.\
    \  For additional information on the accomplishments under this assistance listing,\
    \ please visit the following website: \n https://www.epa.gov/puget-sound."
  year: '2021'
- description: "Skagit County has been reducing pollution in Samish Bay since 2010.\
    \ The county has addressed all large sources of pollution; it’s now working to\
    \ find and fix smaller sources. This project supports pollution-source identification\
    \ work using a combination of lab testing, cheaper and faster Coliscan testing\
    \ (which detects fecal pollution), and water-level loggers to identify illegal\
    \ discharges.   \n\nSkagit County will also collect storm data in the Samish River\
    \ watershed and in Samish Bay. Storm data from the watershed tells the county\
    \ where it should focus its efforts.   \n\nEPA's Puget Sound Geographic Program's\
    \ Stormwater Strategic Initiative funding resulted in a Journal of Environmental\
    \ Management Publication: \"Biochar and fungi as bioretention amendments for bacteria\
    \ and PAH removal from stormwater.\"  These findings suggest that PAHs in stormwater\
    \ can be remediated with bioretention, are unlikely to accumulate in bioretention\
    \ media, and that biochar amendments can improve the treatment of E. coli. https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301479722024884\
    \   \n\nThe implementation strategies for BIBI and Toxics in Fish are complete\
    \ and finalized.   \n\nThe Stormwater SIL was successful in creating valuable\
    \ planning strategies that have been successfully operationalized for developing\
    \ Action Agenda priorities, funding recommendations, Ecosystem Coordination Board\
    \ priorities, Southern Resident Killer Whale Recommendations, enacted legislation,\
    \ and the Washington State Stormwater Strategy. These have also given them a strategic\
    \ approach to reacting to emerging threats like the acutely toxic constituents\
    \ of tires--recently identified by partners. The team also designed the approach\
    \ to updating the Action Agenda that utilizes the Implementation Strategies and\
    \ their key priorities as the basis for recovery community engagement and the\
    \ development of the next Action Agenda"
  year: '2022'
- description: "One Strategic Initiative state agency released a report on 6PPD to\
    \ (1) identify vulnerable aquatic areas where roads meet salmon bearing streams;\
    \ (2) analyze 6PPD-quinone in water samples to support future research; and identify\
    \ best management practices that are likely to reduce 6PPD-quinone toxicity in\
    \ stormwater runoff.     \n\nOne project provides a systematic identification\
    \ and rating of all streams and embayments along the marine shoreline component\
    \ of the railroad operated by Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railway (BNSF). The\
    \ outcomes improve understanding of the stream characteristics and stream crossing\
    \ structures between Olympia and Canada. Because these stream crossing structures\
    \ occur at the mouths of regional streams, they may affect the potential restoration\
    \ value of upstream projects. In addition, the railroad affects long contiguous\
    \ lengths of shoreline and, therefore, these sites represent a large fraction\
    \ of non-natal stream habitats available to juvenile salmonids for rearing.  The\
    \ project team identified all locations where streams cross the BNSF Railway along\
    \ the Salish Sea shoreline between Olympia and Canada. Field data were collected\
    \ to characterize stream, crossing structure, and habitat conditions for 196 stream\
    \ crossing structures. Field and regional data were compiled to evaluate 13 embayments.\
    \ The project team created and applied a site prioritization framework that identifies\
    \ stream or embayment habitat priorities for Chinook salmon.    \n\nAnother project\
    \ builds upon previous work funded by the Habitat Strategic Initiative Lead in\
    \ which all coastal streams and embayments with a railroad track crossing at the\
    \ marine shoreline of Puget Sound were identified, rated, and prioritized for\
    \ restoration. This project builds upon that success and will continue the planning\
    \ efforts to restore coastal streams and embayments impacted by the railroad.\
    \  The project advanced restoration planning at coastal stream mouths and embayments\
    \ along the railroad on the Puget Sound shoreline by 1) engaging Burlington Northern\
    \ Santa Fe Railway (BNSF) and local restoration partners, 2) developing programmatic\
    \ restoration recommendations for evaluating restoration constructability and\
    \ design, and 3) by applying the recommendations to develop restoration concepts\
    \ for three pilot priority sites.   \n\nThe EPA funded Puget Sound Shellfish Strategic\
    \ Initiative is funding a new $1.5M subaward with the Washington State Department\
    \ of Agriculture Dairy Nutrient Management Program with a climate resiliency focus.\
    \  An exciting twist on the longer-term PIC/livestock manure support the Puget\
    \ Sound program has provided.   Manure flooding emergencies are hoped to be avoided\
    \ in North Sound.   \n\nThe Sound Choices Checklist has been finalized and is\
    \ ready for deployment.  This is a major deliverable for the Habitat Strategic\
    \ Initiative Lead who spearheaded this effort with support from many state agencies.\
    \  They also engaged other partners including long-range planners from local jurisdictions\
    \ for feedback and beta testing.  The checklist is intended for use by local jurisdictions\
    \ to assess their comprehensive plans for alignment with Puget Sound recovery\
    \ goals. The checklist is intended for use by local jurisdictions to assess their\
    \ comprehensive plans for alignment with Puget Sound recovery goals.   \n\nThe\
    \ SIL investment plan was a significant milestone. It covered a range of topics,\
    \  and provided a level of focus and detail that will allow them to solicit projects\
    \ that are carefully targeted at strategic priorities. This level of detail is\
    \ a significant improvement in predictability for respondents and recovery practitioners.\
    \ It means that people know what types of projects they are likely to fund, and\
    \ which might represent a poor investment of time on the part of applicants and\
    \ the review teams"
  year: '2023'
rules_regulations: For grants and cooperative agreements with local governments, tribal
  governments and special purpose districts, the procedures and requirements should
  be in conformance with 2 CFR 200 and 1500 (EPA Uniform Administrative Requirements,
  Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards); 40 CFR Part 33 (Participation
  by Disadvantaged Business Enterprises in United States Environmental Protection
  Agency Programs); 40 CFR Part 35 Subpart P (Financial Assistance for the National
  Estuary Program).
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/b532c5cc11fc4d1ca2e23f889010287f/view
sub-agency: N/A
title: 'Geographic Programs - Puget Sound Action Agenda: Technical Investigations
  and Implementation Assistance Program'
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=107b5603d1e4286340ded516d9074b0e
---
