---
agency: Environmental Protection Agency
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized lndian Tribal Governments
assistance_types:
- Cooperative Agreements (Discretionary Grants)
- Provision of Specialized Services
authorizations:
- text: Clean Water Act Section 320 & Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (IIJA).
    Pub. L. 117, 58.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/117/public/58
beneficiary_types:
- Anyone/general public
- Federally Recognized Indian Tribal Governments
categories:
- Environmental Quality - Water Pollution Control
cfda: '66.121'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=66.121
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: 'Puget Sound has been designated as one of 28 estuaries of National Significance
  under §320 of the Clean Water Act. The goal of the National Estuary Program is to
  attain and maintain water quality in designated estuaries that would assure protection
  of public water supplies and the protection and propagation of a balanced, indigenous
  population of shellfish, fish and wildlife and allows recreational activities in
  and on the water. The Puget Sound National Estuary Program''s approved Comprehensive
  Conservation and Management Plan (CCMP) is the Action Agenda. The Action Agenda
  for Puget Sound charts the course to recovery of our nation''s largest estuary–it
  complements and incorporates the work of many partners from around Puget Sound to
  describe regional strategies and specific actions needed to recover Puget Sound.
  These strategies and actions provide opportunities for federal, state, local, tribal,
  and private entities to better invest resources and coordinate actions. The EPA
  is committed to protecting and improving water quality and minimizing the adverse
  impacts of rapid development in the Puget Sound Basin. These commitments include
  protecting the watersheds and waters of Puget Sound by protecting the fundamental
  watershed processes that provide and create aquatic habitats and by reducing the
  generation and release of toxic, nutrient and pathogen pollution. The Puget Sound
  Protection and Restoration: Tribal Implementation Assistance Program is aimed at
  assisting the Indian Tribes of the greater Puget Sound basin in their efforts to
  carry out work critically needed for Puget Sound protection and restoration. This
  work includes activities identified in, or consistent with, the Action Agenda such
  as efforts called for by established salmon recovery plans in the Puget Sound basin.
  EPA has a trust responsibility to Federally recognized Indian Tribes. EPA also recognizes
  that Federally recognized Indian Tribes in the greater Puget Sound basin have a
  critical role in the protection and restoration of the ecosystem and its resources.
  EPA seeks to provide financial assistance to these Tribes to help them implement
  priority strategies and actions in or consistent with the approved Clean Water Act
  §320 CCMP for Puget Sound. Program has considered relevant approaches to achieving
  the intended goals and objectives of the program consistent with statutory requirements,
  including priorities in Executive Order 14052 (Implementation of the Infrastructure
  Investment and Jobs Act), to invest public dollars equitably, create jobs and high
  labor stands, ensure goods and services are made in America, and build infrastructure
  that is resilient and helps combat the climate crisis using Infrastructure Investment
  and Jobs Act (IIJA) funds. Funding Priorities - Fiscal Year 2023: Tribal Capacity
  (non-competitive) Capacity grants will be continued with funding in FFY2023 funding
  to support each Tribe and Consortium to participate in the Puget Sound Management
  Conference, depending on appropriations. Eligible tasks include representing tribal
  interests in Management Conference forums and processes and other activities like
  identifying limiting factors to habitat protection and salmon and shellfish recovery.
  Tribal Implementation Lead (competitive) This grant was competed and will be funded
  with Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act funding for five years, to support eligible
  subaward work which includes watershed and marine/estuary habitat restoration projects.
  We anticipate that many of these projects will directly address salmon and shellfish
  recovery'
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":14500000.0,"usa_spending_actual":14700000.0},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":14800000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":10550000.0},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":15400000.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":15684000.0}]'
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":1624883.43,"obligation":23684000.0},{"x":"2023","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/66.121.html
popular_name: ''
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "Accomplishments in FFY2016:\r\n\r\nExample Tribal Capacity award accomplishments\
    \ during FY 2016:\r\n\r\n•Completed aerial and historic map review as part of\
    \ a channel re-alignment and fish passage feasibility and alternatives analysis\
    \ of upper Boise Creek (RM 4.3 to 4.6). This task supports development of the\
    \ conceptual design of this habitat restoration project to restore access by anadromous\
    \ salmon including ESA-listed fish of approximately 6,000 lineal feet of stream\
    \ corridor in prime salmon-bearing tributary of the White River within tribe's\
    \ Usual and Accustomed fishing area. Increase in ESA-listed fish production would\
    \ be an estimated 40 chinook, 15 steelhead redds and 100 coho redds. (Puyallup\
    \ Tribe).\r\n\r\n•Continue to actively participate in regional and local Puget\
    \ Sound Management Conference processes and forums, including the Hood Canal Coordinating\
    \ Council (HCCC), the Straits Ecosystem Recovery Network (ERN), and the Salish\
    \ Sea Ecosystem Conference, to discuss issues of concern for the tribe. This includes\
    \ assisting in developing strategies for protecting and restoring habitats and\
    \ species in Hood Canal, Admiralty Inlet and the Strait of Juan de Fuca (Port\
    \ Gamble S'Klallam Tribe).\r\n\r\nExample Lead Organization award accomplishments\
    \ during FY 2016:\r\n\r\n•Completed extended sampling of nutrient sources and\
    \ harmful algal blooms (HABs) for the Sequim Bay watershed (sampling extended\
    \ into FY16 due to extended algae blooms), and initiated statistical analysis\
    \ of sampling results (sub-award to Jamestown S'Klallam Tribe)\r\n\r\n•Continuing\
    \ to lead coordination and integration of data and analyses for Skagit Watershed\
    \ Salmon Recovery Plan, including working with subgroups on modeling and GIS analysis\
    \ (sub-award to Skagit River System Cooperative)\r\n Accomplishments in FFY2016:\r\
    \n \r\n Example Tribal Capacity award accomplishments during FY 2016:\r\n •Completed\
    \ aerial and historic map review as part of a channel re-alignment and fish passage\
    \ feasibility and alternatives analysis of upper Boise Creek (RM 4.3 to 4.6).\
    \ This task supports development of the conceptual design of this habitat restoration\
    \ project to restore access by anadromous salmon including ESA-listed fish of\
    \ approximately 6,000 lineal feet of stream corridor in prime salmon-bearing tributary\
    \ of the White River within tribe's Usual and Accustomed fishing area. Increase\
    \ in ESA-listed fish production would be an estimated 40 chinook, 15 steelhead\
    \ redds and 100 coho redds. (Puyallup Tribe).\r\n •Continue to actively participate\
    \ in regional and local Puget Sound Management Conference processes and forums,\
    \ including the Hood Canal Coordinating Council (HCCC), the Straits Ecosystem\
    \ Recovery Network (ERN), and the Salish Sea Ecosystem Conference, to discuss\
    \ issues of concern for the tribe. This includes assisting in developing strategies\
    \ for protecting and restoring habitats and species in Hood Canal, Admiralty Inlet\
    \ and the Strait of Juan de Fuca (Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe).\r\n \r\n Example\
    \ Lead Organization award accomplishments during FY 2016:\r\n •Completed extended\
    \ sampling of nutrient sources and harmful algal blooms (HABs) for the Sequim\
    \ Bay watershed (sampling extended into FY16 due to extended algae blooms), and\
    \ initiated statistical analysis of sampling results (subaward to Jamestown S'Klallam\
    \ Tribe)\r\n •Continuing to lead coordination and integration of data and analyses\
    \ for Skagit Watershed Salmon Recovery Plan, including working with subgroups\
    \ on modeling and GIS analysis (subaward to Skagit River System Cooperative)"
  year: '2016'
- description: 'Projects funded by Lead Tribal Organization Samish Indian Nation.
    In the past 4 years, Samish Indian Nation Department of Natural Resources (DNR),
    in partnership with the state department of natural resources and others, has
    removed over 500,000 pounds of treated wood and other marine debris from public
    and private shorelines. Samish DNR surveyed islands for creosote and marine debris
    and located 325 creosote or marine debris sites within the San Juan Islands.  European
    green crabs were detected on Graveyard Spit on the Dungeness National Wildlife
    Refuge in April 2017 through monitoring conducted by Washington Sea Grant and
    the refuge. To date 90 live crabs have been caught on the refuge in a trapping
    effort led by the Refuge and WDFW invasive species specialists. A single green
    crab was also found in the Jimmycomelately Creek estuary.  Tribal Capacity Grantees
    Suquamish Indian Tribe: In August 2017, 802 acres within the Liberty Bay Shellfish
    Growing Area were upgraded to either Approved or Conditionally Approved by the
    state health department. The Tribe requested the health department to evaluate
    the classification in 2012, and has been involved in many activities to improve
    the water quality within the watershed since the growing area was downgraded in
    May 1991. In addition, Suquamish continued to actively participate in Puget Sound
    regional planning processes that included the WCLIO, the West Sound Nearshore
    Integration and Synthesis Project Workgroup, and the Puget Sound Shoreline Armor
    Implementation Strategy Identification Team'
  year: '2017'
- description: 15 capacity grantees have participated in local processes such as Shoreline
    and Growth Management Act forums. 17 Tribes have engaged in regional salmon recovery
    and Action Agenda meetings. 21 Tribes have engaged in collecting or providing
    data, traditional knowledge, or other information to local and regional processes.
    Several Tribes have engaged in creating tribal mechanisms relating to tribal environmental
    prioritizing in Puget Sound.
  year: '2018'
- description: 'Here are some examples from Puget Sound Tribal grantees **Grantee
    has been a leader in multi-agency efforts to restore the Elwha River and other
    streams on the North Olympic Peninsula, as well as a largescale cleanup and restoration
    effort within Port Angeles Harbor. The Elwha River ecosystem is still in the early
    “re-colonization” stage of a 4-phase recovery – 1) Preservation, 2) Re-colonization,
    3) Local Adaptation, and 4) Viable Natural Population. Ecosystem recovery associated
    with these large-scale restoration projects will contribute significantly to the
    recovery of salmonids, forage fish, and shellfish populations in the Strait of
    Juan de Fuca and greater Puget Sound. The Tribe is observing positive signs of
    increase in Steelhead trout, Coho, and Chinook salmon stocks. **Clam garden work
    has been highlighted in a Salish Sea Currents magazine article on Implementation
    Strategies sponsored by EPA - Puget Sound (https://www.eopugetsound.org/magazine/IS/clam-garden).
    **The Tribe prepared a Climate Vulnerability Assessment report and model for habitat
    and associated fisheries in the inland waters of northern Washington State (https://swinomish.org/media/102218/fishvulmodel_final.pdf).
    This information informed preparation of a draft of the Climate Change Adaptation
    Strategies for Shellfish, which expands on the Tribe’s Climate Adaptation Plan.
    One such adaptation strategy is the restoration of clam gardening, an ancient
    Indigenous aquaculture technique that sustainably promotes native clam populations
    as well as supports tribal health and wellbeing. The Swinomish Fisheries Department
    and Community Environmental Health Program decided to initiate a clam garden project,
    see media coverage: (https://www.washingtonpost.com/climate-solutions/2020/11/24/native-americans-climate-change-swinomish/?arc404=true).
    **Clam garden video was completed https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9dDesE4u07U
    Draft principles for riparian restoration through new regulatory approaches drafted
    and shared with state-tribal riparian workgroup. **A Climate Vulnerability Assessment
    report and model for habitat and associated fisheries in the inland waters of
    northern Washington State has been prepared (https://swinomish.org/media/102218/fishvulmodel_final.pdf).
    **The Puget Sound Kelp Recovery Plan (https://nwstraits.org/media/3020/pugetsoundkelpconservationandrecoveryplan.pdf)
    was published. **One Tribe has a long standing and much celebrated Outreach and
    Education program that includes classroom lessons, field trips, hatchery tours
    and festival participation. Outreach and education are important components to
    the Stillaguamish Watershed Chinook Salmon Recovery Plan and the Puget Sound Action
    Agenda. Many of the ongoing recovery projects in the watershed require awareness,
    support, and involvement from the public. It is critical to work closely with
    the public and private landowners through outreach and education events. They
    can assist in identifying and implementing restoration and protection measures
    that will help improve recovery of Chinook Salmon in the Stillaguamish Watershed.
    In addition, working in local schools provides the opportunity to educate the
    future stewards of the Stillaguamish watershed through in-class lessons and service-learning
    projects, helping to create awareness, caring and protective behavior for this
    region’s natural resources, impacts from climate change and protection of salmon
    and salmon habitat. **A European Green Crab Early Detection and Monitoring program
    has been established in the Port Susan Bay of Whidbey Basin in Puget Sound, Washington.
    The primary objective of this project was to conduct green crab early detection
    critical to protecting the ecosystems of Port Susan and South Skagit Bay. Tribal
    staff completed a full season of crap trapping and found no evidence of green
    crabs. **After years of negotiation, an agreement has been signed to purchase
    over 900 acres adjacent to the Tribe''s reservation, a purchase and sale agreement
    for development rights on 18.4 acres of the former Port Gamble mill site, which
    will close in 2021 protecting the shoreline into perpetuity, and a Port Gamble
    master plan that will move forward to the permitting phase. This was a successful
    mediation that set the course for future generations of tribal members and residents
    around Port Gamble Bay to work collaboratively toward protecting resources and
    the Tribe''s cultural way of life, as well as the economic vitality of the area.
    ** A Tribe and the Puget Sound Salmon Recovery Council (SRC) are working to develop
    a regional Puget Sound recovery subcommittee to bring in Diversion, Equity, and
    Inclusion/Environmental Justice/tribal treaty rights into salmon and Puget Sound
    recovery. While this was originally a task for just the SRC, the Tribe and other
    subcommittee members will be recruiting additional members from other leadership
    Boards within the Puget Sound recovery community (Puget Sound “Management Conference”).
    Tribes have been involved in the Puget Sound Partnership-led process relating
    to diversity, equity, and inclusion, but will bring treaty rights elements here
    and relate them to the “Healthy Environment for All” (HEAL) Act, recently passed
    by the Washington Legislature. The subcommittee’s goal is to: Improve awareness
    of diversity, equity, and inclusion practices, environmental justice, and tribal
    treaty rights.'
  year: '2020'
- description: One Tribe has completed capture-mark-recapture data collection, data
    entry, and database QA/QC for year 1. Completed the smallmouth bass otolith collection
    and began mounting and sectioning otoliths in preparation for aging. They completed
    model development for analyzing count and capture-recapture data and have completed
    all runs (with all appropriate species) of one model and have run at least one
    species in the remaining three models. One Tribe celebrated a groundbreaking ceremony
    at clam garden site and a clam garden video was completed. One major habitat restoration
    project removing the Haberzetle Dam in the Snoqualmie Valley was completed. Recent
    accomplishments for one Puget Sound Tribe include onsite field data collection
    to inform the restoration design for three floodplain restoration projects including
    the Trafton floodplain, Cicero floodplain, and zis a ba. Other successes from
    the recent reporting period include continued K-12 hatchery tours and field trips
    to improve environmental education in the Watershed. Another success is the ongoing
    production of a virtual estuary education fieldtrip video. This video has provided
    a unique opportunity for a diverse group of technical and Tribal staff to collaborate,
    discuss opportunities for virtual education, and share technical and Tribal cultural
    knowledge in the field. Also based on the connections with State agencies established
    through the Tribe's involvement in the Puget Sound Management Conference, the
    Tribe was able to secure last minute funding for a high priority instream project
    on the South Fork Stillaguamish at Gold Basin. The Gold Basin landslide is the
    single largest contributor of fine sediment in the South Fork and one of the largest
    in the entire Stillaguamish Watershed. The sediment contributed at this location
    degrades nearly 50 miles of spawning and rearing habitat for ESA listed Chinook,
    steelhead, and Bull trout. Limiting contributions from this landslide were identified
    in the Stillaguamish Chapter of the Puget Sound Chinook Recovery Plan and the
    project has been a priority for the Tribe for more than 30 years. A recent accomplishment
    is a Clark Creek restoration project, in which the Tribe has partnered with state
    and county offices. Depending upon successful funding for the project proposal,
    the Tribe hopes to begin assessment and planning next year, in 2023. The overall
    goal would be to improve tributary fish passage and large river floodplain habitats.
    One Tribe’s effort has helped identify a design alternative and facilitate coordination
    with the Skagit Land Trust for a barrier removal project on a tributary to the
    Skagit River. The result was a creative approach that removed three passage barriers
    and returned the creek to its historic footprint. This will significantly improve
    habitat conditions for a variety of species.
  year: '2021'
- description: "For the first time in years, a local Tribe’s ceremonial, and subsistence\
    \ fishery for coho salmon opened on the Elwha River. Many years of the large Elwha\
    \ dam removal effort, the long-term cooperative recovery monitoring effort that\
    \ ensued, and the process through which co-managers have determined fishery status\
    \ on the river have made this possible. For over a decade, the Tribe has used\
    \ EPA Puget Sound funds to support its engagement with multiple partners in the\
    \ intensive monitoring and restoration activities in the floodplain and watershed\
    \ during and following dam removal.  \n\nAnother Tribe celebrated the success\
    \ of a Dungeness River floodplain reconnection project, partially funded by EPA\
    \ Puget Sound Tribal Implementation Lead award. As described by the JSKT Habitat\
    \ Program Manager, \"Seven months ago, the Dungeness River east floodplain at\
    \ the Nature Center was a line of porta potties and a parking lot behind a dike.\
    \ Today, it's a reconnected, salmon-friendly floodplain and side channel, conveying\
    \ floodwaters peacefully down the valley. The bridge is wildly popular with the\
    \ public, and the old parking lots and county road are out of harm's way.\" \n\
    \n Another Tribe resurrected the ancient practice of clam gardening that is in\
    \ part funded by EPA’s Puget Sound Tribal Capacity Grants.  Early clam gardens\
    \ date back as far as 3,500 years ago. Indigenous leaders from Washington state\
    \ Tribe and Canadian tribes and community members and biologists were brought\
    \ together to continue to construct a rock wall at the low tide line. EPA staff\
    \ joined the Tribal communities for the first rock wall construction session last\
    \ spring. Sediment filters through the holes between the rocks and extends the\
    \ shallow, gently sloping habitat favorable to native littleneck clams, sea cucumbers,\
    \ sea urchins, star fish and invertebrates that live on trapped seagrass and kelp.\
    \ A 2014 study in British Columbia found that clam biomass (clams per square foot)\
    \ was up to four times greater within the clam gardens.                      \
    \                                                                            \
    \                                                                            \
    \                              \n\nPuget Sound funds have allowed a Tribe to expand\
    \ the scope of their East Fork Nookachamps watershed assessment. As the project\
    \ has progressed, they have identified additional information needs for surface\
    \ water quality and groundwater. This information will serve a variety of purposes\
    \ now and into the future, including assessing baseline conditions, informing\
    \ project selection and design, predicting responses of management actions, and\
    \ long-term monitoring. \n\nOne Tribe has continued to make significant progress\
    \ advancing large scale floodplain/estuary restoration in the Stillaguamish watershed.\
    \   \n\nEducators are very open and excited about getting their students outside\
    \ and hands on with the Hatchery Tours and Iverson fieldtrips. Taking advantage\
    \ of land-based access sites has increased a Tribe’s ability to collect data for\
    \ nearshore seining, due to difficult boat weather conditions.  Stillaguamish\
    \ has been successful at collecting over 180 samples and monitoring seal haul-out\
    \ locations and behavior. They learned that tagged seals are not moving up-river\
    \ and do not seem to have any spatial shifts in response to salmon migration windows.\
    \ Staff have been trained and have become proficient in using Survey123 and ArcGIS\
    \ online. Using these apps on a tablet or smart phones has substantially increased\
    \ the Tribe’s capacity to complete invasive plant surveys. \n\nA pilot project\
    \ led by the Nisqually Tribe, with partners including Cedar Grove Compost, Washington\
    \ Department of Fish and Wildlife, NOAA, University of Washington, Long Live the\
    \ Kings, and Northwest Indian Fisheries Commission has been receiving funds through\
    \ the Puget Sound Tribal Implementation Lead.  The project site is in the Ohop\
    \ Creek valley, the third largest salmon-bearing tributary to the Nisqually River,\
    \ and where the Tribe has been conducting floodplain restoration for over 2 decades.\
    \ A biofiltration structure routes stormwater runoff from Highway 7 (a main corridor\
    \ for Mount Rainier traffic) through a 60% sand / 40% compost mixture prior to\
    \ discharge into Ohop valley wetlands. Preliminary measurements indicate removal\
    \ of 92% of 6PPD from this treatment process. The results of this work have implications\
    \ for stormwater quality treatment throughout Puget Sound and beyond."
  year: '2022'
rules_regulations: For grants and cooperative agreements with local governments, tribal
  governments and special purpose districts, the procedures and requirements should
  be in conformance with 2 CFR 200 and 1500 (EPA Uniform Administrative Requirements,
  Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements for Federal Awards); 40 CFR Part 33 (Participation
  by Disadvantaged Business Enterprises in United States Environmental Protection
  Agency Programs)
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/479c61f601f141bfa529953001fc2066/view
sub-agency: N/A
tax_expenditures: null
title: 'Geographic Programs - Puget Sound Protection and Restoration: Tribal Implementation
  Assistance Program'
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=a0c96cc752f5107f6d71d0f24a705199
---
