---
agency: Department of Health and Human Services
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized Indian Tribal Governments
- Local (includes State-designated Indian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- Native American Organizations (includes Indian groups, cooperatives, corporations,
  partnerships, associations)
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: Social Security Act, Title V, Section 502(a)(1) and (b)(1), as amended; 42
    U.S.C. 702.; Sections 1109, 1110, 1111 and 1112 of the Public Health Service Act
    and Section 399T of the Public Health Service Act; Public Health Service Act,
    § 330M (42 U.S.C. § 254c-19), as amended;  42 U.S.C. 254c-21 (Public Health Service
    Act, Title III Section 330O); 42 U.S.C. § 701(a)(2) (Title V, § 501(a)(2) of the
    Social Security Act).
  url: null
beneficiary_types:
- Child (6-15)
- Health Professional
- Infant (0-5)
- Specialized group (e.g. health professionals, students, veterans)
- Student/Trainee
- Women
categories:
- Health - Education and Training
- Health - Health Services Planning and Technical Assistance
- Health - Maternity, Infants, Children
- Health - Specialized Health Research and Training
cfda: '93.110'
fiscal_year: '2024'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=93.110
improper_payments: null
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "The Special Projects of Regional and National Significance Program (SPRANS)\
  \ carries out maternal and child health (MCH) projects to support training and research;\
  \ oral health integration; genetic disease testing, counseling, and information\
  \ development and dissemination programs; newborn screening for sickle cell anemia\
  \ and other genetic disorders; and comprehensive hemophilia diagnostic and treatment\
  \ centers.  \n\nThe Community Integrated Service Systems program works to develop\
  \ and expand home visitation; participation of obstetricians and pediatricians;\
  \ integrated service delivery systems; maternal and child health centers; services\
  \ for rural populations; and integrated state and community service systems for\
  \ children and youth with special health care needs.  \n\nThe Heritable Disorders\
  \ program serves to improve the ability of States 1) to provide newborn and child\
  \ screening for heritable disorders and 2) to expand screenings as the capacity\
  \ to screen for genetic and congenital conditions expands Newborn and child screenings\
  \ occur at intervals across the life span of every child. Newborn screening universally\
  \ provides early identification and follow-up for treatment of infants affected\
  \ by certain genetic, metabolic, hormonal and/or functional conditions.  \n\nThe\
  \ Supporting Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) Screening and Intervention helps\
  \ reduce alcohol use during pregnancy and improves outcomes for children with FASD\
  \ nationwide, especially in communities where there is a high rate of binge drinking\
  \ during pregnancy, including rural areas and medically underserved communities.\
  \ The program focuses on educating primary care providers and increasing the use\
  \ of screening, intervention, and referral processes for high-risk pregnancies.\
  \ \n\nThe Screening and Treatment for Maternal Mental Health and Substance Use Disorders\
  \ (MMHSUD) program aims to expand health care providers’ capacity to screen, assess,\
  \ treat, and refer pregnant and postpartum people for maternal mental health and\
  \ substance use disorders. This is accomplished by establishing, improving, and/or\
  \ maintaining statewide, tribal, or regional networks that provide real-time psychiatric\
  \ consultation, a spectrum of resource and referral services, and culturally and\
  \ linguistically appropriate training to maternity care providers and clinical practices.\
  \  The Pediatric Mental Health Care Access (PMHCA) program promotes behavioral health\
  \ integration in pediatric primary care by supporting the planning and development\
  \ of State, regional or tribal pediatric mental health care tele-consultation access\
  \ programs that help these, and other providers including in emergency departments\
  \ and schools diagnose, treat, and refer children with behavioral health conditions.\
  \ PMHCA works to address the shortages of psychiatrists, developmental-behavioral\
  \ pediatricians, and other behavioral health clinicians to support children and\
  \ adolescents with behavioral concerns. The Integrated Maternal Health Services\
  \ program fosters the development and demonstration of integrated maternal health\
  \ services models, such as the maternity medical home, which is modeled after the\
  \ patient-centered medical home. The purpose of the program is to improve maternal\
  \ health outcomes in the United States by increasing access to quality, equitable,\
  \ comprehensive care for pregnant and postpartum people who experience health disparities\
  \ and have limited access to basic social and health care services. The Alliance\
  \ for Innovation on Maternal Health (AIM) program promotes safety and quality of\
  \ care during and immediately after childbirth and addresses the high rates of maternal\
  \ morbidity and mortality in the U.S. It is the national, cross-sector commitment\
  \ designed to lead in the identification, development, implementation, and dissemination\
  \ of patient safety bundles for the promotion of safe care for every U.S. birth.\
  \ The AIM Technical Assistance Center supports all entities participating in the\
  \ AIM program to increase birthing facility engagement, support bundle implementation\
  \ and sustainability, manage reporting and analysis of state AIM data, and promote\
  \ safe care for pregnant and postpartum people. The State Maternal Health Innovation\
  \ program creates state-led maternal health task forces to bring together the voices\
  \ of key leaders, and pregnant and postpartum individuals using state-specific maternal\
  \ health data to develop and implement innovative approaches to address the most\
  \ pressing maternal health needs and disparities. State approaches include strengthening\
  \ partnerships and collaborations, improving state-level data surveillance on maternal\
  \ mortality and severe maternal morbidity, and promoting and executing innovation\
  \ in maternal health service delivery.   \n\nThe MCH Research Portfolio includes\
  \ the MCH Research Network (MCH RN), MCH Field-Initiated Innovative Research Studies\
  \ (MCH FIRST), and MCH Secondary Data Analysis (MCH SDAR) programs. MCH RNs focus\
  \ on collaborative, interdisciplinary."
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":324272920.0,"usa_spending_actual":374832004.15},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":274459189.0,"usa_spending_actual":271012476.83},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":259759743.0,"usa_spending_actual":393236.8}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":41487545.28,"obligation":180130573.74},{"x":"2024","outlay":25157142.67,"obligation":49830181.0},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/93.110.html
popular_name: Special Projects of Regional and National Significance (SPRANS), including
  the Community Integrated Service Systems (CISS) and Supporting Fetal
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "In FY 2019, the Leadership Education in Adolescent Health (LEAH) program\
    \ provided interdisciplinary leadership training to 2,197 health and related professionals\
    \ at the graduate and postgraduate levels; enhanced the knowledge and skills of\
    \ nearly 30,000 practicing professionals through the provision of 538 continuing\
    \ education events; and strengthened the capacity of Title V and other MCH partners\
    \ through 650 technical assistance activities to 136,660 recipients in local,\
    \ state, and community entities.   \nIn FY 2020, the Strengthen the Evidence in\
    \ Maternal and Child Health Program provided 44 technical assistance (TA) sessions\
    \ to states and jurisdictions, including several regional TA sessions, topic-specific\
    \ TA, and TA to all Pacific Basin and Atlantic jurisdictions; worked extensively\
    \ with a team of expert reviewers to publish two Evidence Analysis Reports, for\
    \ updates of National Performance Measure (NPM) Online Toolkits, and for TA requests;\
    \ engaged 16 experts in the webinar development of evidence-based, informed strategies\
    \ for the 15 Title V national performance measures, made available to all Title\
    \ V states and jurisdictions’.\nThe heritable disorders program has supported\
    \ the widespread adoption of SCID newborn screening since 2014. In 2012, only\
    \ six states screened for SCID. By 2018, all 50 states and 3 U.S. territories\
    \ screen for SCID. Despite the success of broad SCID newborn screening, gaps remain\
    \ in optimizing outcomes for infants with SCID that is detected by newborn screening.\
    \ Additionally, almost 50% of states have implemented the four new conditions\
    \ (Pompe [2015], X-ALD [2016], MPS I [2016], and SMA [2018]) added to the recommended\
    \ screening panel since 2015."
  year: '2020'
- description: 'The Heritable Disorders Program has supported the widespread adoption
    of newborn screening since 2008. For example, in 2012, only six states screened
    for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). By 2018, all 50 states and 3 U.S.
    territories screen for SCID. Additionally, more than 50% of states have implemented
    four new conditions added to the recommended screening panel since 2013, including
    Pompe disease, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy, Mucopolysaccharidosis type I, and
    Spinal Muscular Atrophy.

    Screening and Treatment for Maternal Depression and Related Behavioral Disorders
    programs improved short- and intermediate-term outcomes in training, consultation,
    and screening services. Awardees trained 1,085 providers in FY 2020, an increase
    from 160 providers trained in FY 2019. Providers received expert consultation
    for 7,448 pregnant and postpartum women in FY 2020, of which 47% lived in rural/underserved
    areas, an increase from 233 pregnant and postpartum women in FY 2019, of which
    30% lived in rural/underserved areas. The number of pregnant and postpartum women
    screened for depression by participating providers increased from 4,053 in FY
    2019 to 24,518 in FY 2021.


    In FY 2021, the Supporting Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder Screening and Intervention
    Program enrolled 10 prenatal and 12 pediatric practices within 14 health centers
    in seven states in their 10-month Project Echo training program. Five of the enrolled
    health centers serve rural, 9 serve urban, and 3 serve tribal communities. At
    the mid-point survey, a high proportion of participants reported: increased knowledge
    about screening for Prenatal Alcohol Exposure (PAE) both during pregnancy and
    among children with possible FASD; improved self-efficacy to screen for PAE and
    counsel families about both PAE and FASD; and increased practice of screening
    for, and counseling patients with alcohol use during pregnancy and screening for
    PAE among children with suspected FASD.'
  year: '2021'
- description: "The Heritable Disorders Program has supported the widespread adoption\
    \ of newborn screening since 2008. For example, in 2012, only six states screened\
    \ for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). By 2018, all 50 states and 3 U.S.\
    \ territories screen for SCID. Currently, all states screen for at least 31 core\
    \ conditions on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP). Across the U.S.,\
    \ 40 out of 53 state newborn screening programs screen for 90% or more of the\
    \ core conditions on the RUSP.\n. \nThe MMHSUD program improved short- and intermediate-term\
    \ outcomes in training, consultation, and screening services. Awardees trained\
    \ 1,875 providers in FY 2022 compared to 782 in FY 2021. The number of providers\
    \ using the MMHSUD program for consultation and care coordination support services\
    \ for treatment and referral of pregnant and postpartum women with behavioral\
    \ health conditions increased from 584 in FY 2021 to 824 in FY 2022. \n \nIn FY\
    \ 2022, the FASD Screening and Intervention program completed their first learning\
    \ collaborative cohort which included 10 prenatal and 12 pediatric practices within\
    \ 14 health centers in 7 states. The program also enrolled their second cohort\
    \ which included 11 prenatal and 11 pediatric practices within 16 health centers\
    \ in seven states. The combined cohorts included health centers serving 9 rural,\
    \ 21 urban, and 7 tribal communities. Participants from the first cohort reported\
    \ increased knowledge about screening for Prenatal Alcohol Exposure (PAE) both\
    \ during pregnancy and among children with possible FASD; improved self-efficacy\
    \ to screen for PAE and counsel families about both PAE and FASD; and increased\
    \ practice of screening for, and counseling patients with alcohol use during pregnancy\
    \ and screening for PAE among children with suspected FASD. \n \nBirthing facilities\
    \ in all 50 states and D.C. are implementing AIM patient safety bundles (PSBs).\
    \ As of February 2023, there are: \n•\t1,917 birthing facilities participating\
    \ in AIM. \n•\t25 states engaged in widespread implementation of AIM PSBs \n•\t\
    7 states are implementing targeted quality improvement projects \n•\t29 states\
    \ implementing the Obstetric Hemorrhage bundle \n•\t34 implementing the Severe\
    \ Hypertension in Pregnancy bundle, and \n•\t27 states implementing the Care for\
    \ Pregnant and Postpartum People with Substance Use Disorder bundle.   \nIn June\
    \ 2023, AIM launched the Obstetric Emergency Readiness Resource Kit, for use by\
    \ teams in healthcare settings that may not typically provide obstetric services\
    \ or frequently care for people experiencing obstetric emergencies. \n \nSince\
    \ 2019, the State Maternal Health Innovation awardees have established Maternal\
    \ Health Task Forces that regularly convene multidisciplinary stakeholders; created\
    \ and are implementing a strategic plan that incorporates activities from the\
    \ state’s most recent Title V Needs Assessment; and reported state-level data\
    \ surveillance on maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity for three years\
    \ in their Maternal Health Annual Reports. \n \nAcross 21 states in FY 2021, the\
    \ PMHCA program achieved the following:  \n•\tOver 6,700 primary care providers\
    \ enrolled in a statewide or regional PMHCA program. \n•\tOver 2,000 providers\
    \ used consultation and care coordination support services\n•\tOver 8,200 children\
    \ and adolescents were served by Pediatric primary care providers who contacted\
    \ the pediatric mental health team. \n  \nAccomplishments from the MCH Research\
    \ Networks in FY 2021 include: \n•\tCompleted 104 studies on a broad range of\
    \ maternal, child, and family health topics \n•\tEnrolled 13,998 participants\
    \ in primary research studies across 475 research sites across the country, and\
    \ included 2,822,373 participants in secondary data analyses \n•\tPublished 75\
    \ peer-reviewed manuscripts in leading scholarly journals"
  year: '2022'
- description: "The Heritable Disorders program has supported the widespread adoption\
    \ of newborn screening since 2008. For example, in 2012, only six states screened\
    \ for severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID). By 2018, all 50 states and 3 U.S.\
    \ territories screen for SCID. Currently, all states screen for at least 32 core\
    \ conditions on the Recommended Uniform Screening Panel (RUSP). Across the U.S.,\
    \ 40 out of 53 state newborn screening programs screen for 92% or more of the\
    \ core conditions on the RUSP. \n\n \n\nIn FY 2023, the MMHSUD program trained\
    \ 899 providers who sought and received expert consultation for 1,511 pregnant\
    \ and postpartum women. Statewide programs are available in Colorado, Kansas,\
    \ Kentucky, Louisiana, Missouri, Mississippi, Montana, North \n\nCarolina, Tennessee,\
    \ Texas, Vermont, and West Virginia. There is also a regional program in Los Angeles\
    \ County, California. \n\n \n\nIn FY 2023, the FASD Screening and Intervention\
    \ program enrolled 16 community health centers in their second learning collaborative\
    \ cohort. This included 11 prenatal practices and 11 pediatric practices from\
    \ 7 states (IL, ND, SD, MN, MA, RI, ME). Six of the 22 practices are tribal health\
    \ clinics and 7 are rural clinics. The third learning collaborative cohort (pediatric\
    \ group) commenced in September 2023 and enrolled 15 health systems, including\
    \ 13 practices from 13 states (CT, ME, MA, MN, NJ, ND, OH, PA, SD, TX, VT, VA,\
    \ WA). The prenatal group from the third cohort will begin in February 2024. Participants\
    \ from the first cohort reported increased knowledge about screening for Prenatal\
    \ Alcohol Exposure (PAE) both during pregnancy and among children with possible\
    \ FASD; improved self-efficacy to screen for PAE and counsel families about both\
    \ PAE and FASD; and increased practice of screening for, and counseling patients\
    \ with alcohol use during pregnancy and screening for PAE among children with\
    \ suspected FASD. \n\n \n\nAs of August 2023, there were 1,996 birthing facilities\
    \ in 49 states and D.C. participating in the Alliance for Innovation on Maternal\
    \ Health (AIM), representing 74.1% of all birthing facilities in those states\
    \ and jurisdictions. Currently, there are eight patient safety bundles that AIM\
    \ state enrollees can choose to implement in birthing facilities, according to\
    \ their needs and priorities: 1) Obstetric hemorrhage, 2) Severe hypertension\
    \ in pregnancy, 3) Safe reduction of primary Cesarean birth, 4) Cardiac conditions\
    \ in obstetric care, 5) Care for pregnant and postpartum people with substance\
    \ use disorder, 6) Perinatal mental health conditions, 7) Postpartum discharge\
    \ transition, and 8) Sepsis in obstetric care. Patient safety bundles are collections\
    \ of evidence-informed best practices, developed by multidisciplinary experts,\
    \ for birthing facilities on topics related to causes of maternal mortality and\
    \ severe maternal morbidity. The bundle elements are actionable steps that are\
    \ implemented through rapid quality improvement cycles and can be adapted to a\
    \ variety of birthing facilities and resource settings.   \n\nSince 2019, the\
    \ State Maternal Health Innovation awardees have established Maternal Health Task\
    \ Forces that regularly convene multidisciplinary stakeholders; created and are\
    \ implementing a strategic plan that incorporates activities from the state’s\
    \ most recent Title V Needs Assessment; and reported state-level data surveillance\
    \ on maternal mortality and severe maternal morbidity for three years in their\
    \ Maternal Health Annual Reports. As of 2024, organizations are carrying out this\
    \ work in 42 states and the District of Columbia. \n\n \n\nAcross 47 awardees\
    \ in FY 2023, the PMHCA program achieved the following:  \n\nOver 10,300 providers\
    \ used consultation and care coordination support services. \n\nOver 28,500 children\
    \ and adolescents were served by pediatric primary care and other providers who\
    \ contacted the pediatric mental health team. \n\n \n\n \n\nAccomplishments from\
    \ the MCH Research Networks in FY 2021 include: \n\nCompleted 104 studies on a\
    \ broad range of maternal, child, and family health topics \n\nEnrolled 13,998\
    \ participants in primary research studies across 475 research sites across the\
    \ country, and included 2,822,373 participants in secondary data analyses \n\n\
    Published 75 peer-reviewed manuscripts in leading scholarly journals"
  year: '2023'
rules_regulations: All HRSA awards are subject to the Uniform Administrative Requirements,
  Cost Principles, and Audit Requirements at 45 CFR part 75. HRSA awards are subject
  to the requirements of the HHS Grants Policy Statement (HHS GPS) that are applicable
  based on recipient type and purpose of award. The HHS GPS is available at https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/hhs-grants-policy-statement-october-2024.pdf.
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/570238742f74415790b02679df18a57c/view
sub-agency: Health Resources and Services Administration
title: Maternal and Child Health Federal Consolidated Programs
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=2bf6d3c3c0af726a751b7442752a0004
---
