---
agency: Department of Health and Human Services
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized Indian Tribal Governments
- Native American Organizations (includes Indian groups, cooperatives, corporations,
  partnerships, associations)
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Specialized group (e.g. health professionals, students, veterans)
- U.S. Territories and possessions
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: Section 811 of the Public Health Service Act, (42 U.S.C. 296j).
  url: null
- text: Public Health Service Act, 811.
  url: null
- text: Public Health Service Act U.S.C. &sect; 42 USC § 296j.
  url: null
beneficiary_types:
- Native American Organizations
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- Specialized group (e.g. health professionals, students, veterans)
categories:
- Education - Health Education and Training
- Education - Nursing Education
- Health - Alcoholism, Drug Abuse and Mental Health - General
- Health - Alcoholism, Drug Abuse and Mental Health - Planning
- Health - Education and Training
- Health - General Health and Medical
- Health - Indian Health
- Health - Mental Health
- Health - Prevention and Control
- Health - Specialized Health Research and Training
cfda: '93.247'
fiscal_year: '2024'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=93.247
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "ANEW:  The purpose of the Advanced Nursing Education Workforce (ANEW)\
  \ Program is to increase the number of primary care nurse practitioners, clinical\
  \ nurse specialists, and certified nurse midwives trained and prepared to provide\
  \ primary care services, mental health and substance use disorder care, and/or maternal\
  \ health care. Grants will support the training and graduation of advanced practice\
  \ registered nursing (APRN) students/trainees in these disciplines. Awardees will\
  \ provide tuition and other eligible supports to trainees, build academic-clinical\
  \ partnerships to facilitate clinical training, and continue to develop and sustain\
  \ clinical faculty and preceptors as needed. Applicants are strongly encouraged\
  \ to recruit students/trainees and faculty from diverse populations. Funding preference\
  \ will be given to eligible entities that train APRNs students to practice in underserved\
  \ and rural communities or state and local health departments.  \n \nANE-NPRF: \
  \ The purpose of this program is to prepare new Advanced Practice Registered Nurses\
  \ (APRNs) to effectively provide primary care by supporting the establishment, expansion\
  \ and/or enhancement of existing community-based Nurse Practitioner (NP) residency\
  \ and fellowship training programs that are accredited or in the accreditation process.\
  \ The program also focuses on the integration of behavioral health and/or maternal\
  \ health into primary care by training new primary care providers (adult, family,\
  \ adult gerontology, pediatric and women’s health NPs), behavioral health providers\
  \ (psychiatric/mental health NPs) and/or Certified Nurse Midwives (CNMs) to transition\
  \ from education completion to practice, in community-based settings. The award\
  \ recipient must train these postgraduate APRNs who will serve in primary care settings\
  \ with a focus on improving access to quality healthcare for rural, urban, and tribal\
  \ underserved populations. \n \nMatCare: The purpose of the MatCare Program is to\
  \ support accredited nurse midwifery programs to train nurse midwives through trainee\
  \ scholarships, stipends, curriculum enhancement, and community-based training.\
  \ The program seeks to grow and diversify the maternal and perinatal health nursing\
  \ workforce through support for education and training in rural and underserved\
  \ communities. \n \nANE-SANE: This program addresses the need to increase the number\
  \ of qualified sexual assault nurse examiners (SANEs). The program expands access\
  \ to forensic examinations thereby expanding access to services for survivors. The\
  \ purpose of this program is to increase the supply, distribution, and quality of\
  \ the sexual assault nurse examiner (SANE) workforce. The program aims to provide\
  \ access to mental and physical care for survivors of sexual assault and domestic\
  \ violence.\n \nANE-NPR: The purpose of this program is to prepare new nurse practitioners\
  \ (NPs) in primary care for practice in community-based settings through clinical\
  \ and academic focused 12-month Nurse Practitioner Residency (NPR) programs, with\
  \ a preference for those projects that benefit rural or underserved populations.\
  \ The ANE-NPR Program seeks to increase primary care providers in community-based\
  \ settings. This program has been structured in a way so that training programs\
  \ are encouraged to support the placement of participants in rural and underserved\
  \ settings and also find ways to assist NPR completers to remain in these settings.\
  \  \nANE-NPRIP: The purpose of this grant program is to prepare new NPs for primary\
  \ care or behavioral health practice in integrated, community-based settings, through\
  \ expansions and/or enhancements to existing 12-month NPR programs. The ANE-NPRIP\
  \ seeks to increase the number of new primary care or behavioral health NPs serving\
  \ in integrated, community-based settings."
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":87081446.0,"usa_spending_actual":86553436.09},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":86290833.0,"usa_spending_actual":81749705.23},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":86290833.0,"usa_spending_actual":0.0}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":44723643.58,"obligation":110246005.0},{"x":"2024","outlay":2934059.62,"obligation":6645872.0},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/93.247.html
popular_name: ANEW, ANE-NPRF, MatCare, ANE-SANE, ANE-NPR, ANE-NPRIP
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: In Academic Year 2017-2018, grantees of the ANEW Program trained 3,787
    nursing students and produced 934 graduates. Of the 1,142 students who were directly
    funded by ANEW, the majority received training in substance use treatment (57
    percent) and/or opioid use treatment (51 percent). In addition, ANEW grantees
    supported 32 faculty and 11 preceptors. To provide clinical training experiences
    to nursing students, grantees partnered with 2,141 clinical training sites in
    primary care settings (78 percent), medically underserved communities (61 percent),
    and/or rural areas (32 percent). ANEW grantees developed or enhanced and offered
    273 curricula, provided 90 continuing education courses to practicing professionals,
    and offered 119 faculty and preceptor development programs.
  year: '2018'
- description: "ANEW: In Academic Year 2019-2020, grantees of the ANEW Program trained\
    \ 4,817 nursing students of which one third of them were underrepresented minorities\
    \ and/or from disadvantaged backgrounds. The ANEW program produced 1,604 graduates\
    \ who were ready to enter the health care workforce. Of the 2,267 students who\
    \ were directly funded by ANEW, the majority trained in primary care settings\
    \ (75 percent) and/or medically underserved communities (65 percent) and received\
    \ training in telehealth (60 percent) and/or opioid use treatment (45 percent).\
    \ More than one in four students who were directly funded received COVID-19 related\
    \ training. One year post graduation data showed that over half of the trainees\
    \ were pursuing additional training in a medically underserved communities. In\
    \ addition, 47 percent of the recently graduated individuals were working in a\
    \ primary care setting. Additionally, ANEW grantees supported 116 faculty and\
    \ 76 preceptors. To provide clinical training experiences to nursing students,\
    \ grantees partnered with 2,433 clinical training sites in primary care settings\
    \ (77 percent), medically underserved communities (68 percent), and/or rural areas\
    \ (32 percent). ANEW grantees offered 500 curricula, provided 122 continuing education\
    \ courses to practicing professionals, and offered 132 faculty and preceptor development\
    \ programs. \nANE-SANE: In Academic Year 2019-2020, grantees from the ANE-SANE\
    \ program trained 1,467 students and produced 228 graduates. The majority of trainees\
    \ were from a rural and/or disadvantaged background (56 percent). About one in\
    \ five SANE trainees received their training in rural areas and just over 40 percent\
    \ of them received their training in medically underserved communities. Approximately\
    \ 28 percent of the students participated in COVID-19 related training. The ANE-SANE\
    \ grantees partnered with 149 clinical training sites in primary care settings\
    \ (18 percent), medically underserved communities (77 percent), and/or rural areas\
    \ (24 percent). SANE grantees developed and/or enhanced 80 courses. ANE-NPR: In\
    \ Academic Year 2019-2020 the ANE-NPR program trained 94 nurse practitioner (NP)\
    \ residents and 84 preceptors. There were a total of 16 NP resident graduates\
    \ in the first year of the program. Sixty-three percent of first year graduates\
    \ are currently employed in FQHCs or look-alikes and Rural Health Clinics. In\
    \ addition, grantees from this program provided direct support to 19 faculty.\
    \ Almost all of the NP residents received training in medically underserved communities\
    \ (99 percent) and/or a primary care setting (99 percent). The majority of the\
    \ NP residents participated in trainings related to COVID-19 (93 percent), opioid\
    \ use treatment (91 percent) and/or telehealth (84 percent). The ANE-NPR grantees\
    \ partnered with 122 clinical training sites to provide experiential training\
    \ experiences to students. The majority of these sites where located in primary\
    \ care settings (58 percent) and/or medically underserved communities (80 percent).\
    \ A total of 792 courses where enhanced or developed, and 173 continuing education\
    \ courses were offered. This program also supported 65 faculty and preceptor development\
    \ training and activities. ANE-NPRIP: In FY 2020, HRSA established the ANE-NPRIP\
    \ Program with nurse practitioner optional fellowship funds to establish or expand\
    \ community-based nurse practitioner that are accredited or in the accreditation\
    \ process for practicing postgraduate nurse practitioners in primary care or behavioral\
    \ health; 5 awards were planned, 10 new awards were made. This program gives preference\
    \ to Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs). Out of the 10 awards, 5 grantees\
    \ are FQHCs (50%) and 3 of the grantees partner with FQHCs (30%). One of the 10\
    \ grantees is mainly focused on serving rural areas, while 3 of the 10 grantees\
    \ are partnered with rural health clinics."
  year: '2020'
- description: "ANEW: In Academic Year 2020-2021, awardees of the ANEW Program trained\
    \ 4,379 nursing students, more than one third of whom were underrepresented minorities\
    \ and/or from disadvantaged backgrounds (38 percent). The ANEW program produced\
    \ 1,644 graduates who were ready to enter the health care workforce. Of the 1,627\
    \ students who were directly funded by ANEW, the majority trained in primary care\
    \ settings (77 percent), in medically underserved communities (75 percent), and/or\
    \ in a setting that offered telehealth (62 percent). Forty-eight percent of students\
    \ received training in opioid use treatment. More than 65 percent of students\
    \ who were directly funded received COVID-19 related training and 37 percent received\
    \ health equity training. For individuals for whom one year post graduation data\
    \ was available, over half were pursuing additional training in a medically underserved\
    \ community (53 percent). In addition, 51 percent of the recently graduated individuals\
    \ were working in a primary care setting.  To provide clinical training experiences\
    \ to nursing students, grantees partnered with 2,049 clinical training sites in\
    \ primary care settings (75 percent), medically underserved communities (65 percent),\
    \ and/or rural areas (33 percent). More than half of the partner sites provided\
    \ to individuals with mental health or substance use disorders (51 percent) and\
    \ uninsured or underinsured individuals and families (52 percent); 21 percent\
    \ offered services to undocumented immigrants. ANEW awardees offered developed\
    \ or enhanced 520 courses for trainees, provided 135 continuing education courses\
    \ to practicing professionals, and offered 167 faculty and preceptor development\
    \ programs. \n\nANE-SANE: In Academic Year 2020-2021, awardees from the ANE-SANE\
    \ program trained 2,360 students and produced 858 graduates. The majority of trainees\
    \ were from a rural and/or disadvantaged background (57 percent). More than half\
    \ of SANE trainees received their training in medically underserved communities\
    \ (53 percent) and about one in ten received training in rural areas (13 percent).\
    \ Twenty-one percent of students participated in health equity training and approximately\
    \ 19 percent participated in COVID-19 related training. The ANE-SANE awardees\
    \ partnered with 169 clinical training sites in primary care settings (21 percent),\
    \ medically underserved communities (81 percent), and/or rural areas (28 percent).\
    \ More than 90 percent of the sites provided services to victims of interpersonal\
    \ violence, abuse, or trauma. SANE grantees developed and/or enhanced 109 courses,\
    \ 28 percent of which were focused on evidence-based practice. HRSA made 20 new\
    \ awards in FY 2021. \n\nANE-NPR: In Academic Year 2020-2021 the ANE-NPR program\
    \ trained 319 nurse practitioner (NP) residents and graduated 171 NP residents.\
    \ Almost all of the NP residents received training in medically underserved communities\
    \ (99 percent) and/or a primary care setting (99 percent). Moreover, the majority\
    \ of the NP residents participated in trainings related to COVID-19 (96 percent),\
    \ opioid use treatment (90 percent) and/or trained in a setting that offered telehealth\
    \ (90 percent). Sixty-six percent of AY 2020-2021 graduates were employed in a\
    \ primary care setting \n63 percent were employed in a medically underserved community,\
    \ and 26 percent were employed in a rural area. Of prior year graduates, 77 percent\
    \ were working in primary care settings one year after graduation, 77 percent\
    \ were working in medically underserved communities, and 31 percent were working\
    \ in a rural area. Fifty-two percent of AY 2020-2021 graduates and 77 percent\
    \ of prior year graduates were employed in FQHCs or look-alikes and\nRural Health\
    \ Clinics.\n\nANE-NPRIP:  In Academic Year 2020-2021, the ANE-NPRIP Program trained\
    \ 49 NP residents, 22 percent of whom were from underrepresented minority and/or\
    \ disadvantaged backgrounds. One hundred percent of the NP residents received\
    \ training in primary care settings and medically underserved communities, and\
    \ 43 percent received training in rural settings. Moreover, all NP residents participated\
    \ in trainings related to COVID-19 (100 percent), health equity (100 percent),\
    \ and integrated behavioral health in primary care (100 percent) and trained in\
    \ a setting that offers telehealth (100 percent). Eighty-eight percent of residents\
    \ received training in medication assisted treatment (MAT) for substance use disorder/opioid\
    \ use disorder, leading to 55 percent of residents receiving a waiver from the\
    \ Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration to prescribe MAT."
  year: '2021'
- description: "ANEW: In Academic Year 2021-2022, awardees of the ANEW Program trained\
    \ 3,964 nursing students, more than one half of whom were underrepresented minorities\
    \ and/or from disadvantaged backgrounds (53%). The ANEW program produced 1,468\
    \ graduates who were ready to enter the health care workforce. Of the 1,468 students\
    \ who were directly funded by ANEW, the majority trained in primary care settings\
    \ (77%), in medically underserved communities (75%), and/or in a setting that\
    \ offered telehealth (62%). To provide clinical training experiences to nursing\
    \ students, grantees partnered with 2,017 clinical training sites in primary care\
    \ settings (70%), medically underserved communities (71%), and/or rural areas\
    \ (32%). For individuals for whom one year post graduation data was available,\
    \ over half were pursuing additional training in a medically underserved community\
    \ (71%). In addition, 74% of the recently graduated individuals were working in\
    \ a primary care setting. ANEW awardees offered developed or enhanced 874 courses\
    \ for trainees, provided 168 continuing education courses to practicing professionals,\
    \ and offered 34 faculty and preceptor development programs. In FY 23, the ANEW\
    \ program was re-competed, and HRSA intends to make awards to 56 applicants. \
    \ \n\nANE-SANE: In Academic Year 2021-2022, awardees from the ANE-SANE program\
    \ trained 2,930 students and produced 580 graduates. The majority of trainees\
    \ were from a rural and/or disadvantaged background (68%). Over 30% of SANE trainees\
    \ received their training in medically underserved communities and about 22% of\
    \ these trainees received training in rural areas . Twenty- seven percent of students\
    \ participated in health equity training and approximately 21% participated in\
    \ COVID-19 related training. The ANE-SANE awardees partnered with  214 clinical\
    \ training sites in primary care settings (16%), medically underserved communities\
    \ (71%), and/or rural areas (34%). More than 90% of the sites provided services\
    \ to victims of interpersonal violence, abuse, or trauma. SANE awardees developed\
    \ and/or enhanced 170  courses. Over 25% of the 580 graduates are currently employed\
    \ in Medically Underserved Community, 6% employed in Primary Care Settings, and\
    \ 11% employed in Rural Areas. In FY 2022, ANE-SANE received additional funding\
    \ to fund 8 additional applicants, bringing the total number of awardees to 28.\
    \ In FY23, ANE-SANE awarded continued funding to 28 awardees. \n\nANE-NPR: In\
    \ Academic Year 2021-2022, the ANE-NPR program trained 383 nurse practitioner\
    \ (NP) residents and graduated 197 NP residents. Most of the NP residents received\
    \ training in medically underserved communities and/or a primary care setting\
    \ (96%), while others received training in a rural setting (38%). A majority of\
    \ the NP residents participated in trainings related to COVID-19 (97%), Health\
    \ Equity/Social Determinants of Health (93%), substance  use treatment (93%) and/or\
    \ trained in a setting that offered telehealth (92%) and had behavioral health\
    \ integrated in primary care (91%). Sixty-five percent of AY 2021-2022 graduates\
    \ were employed in a primary care setting, 63% were employed in a medically underserved\
    \ community, 34% were employed in a rural area, and 43% in FQHCs or look-alikes.\
    \ In FY 2022, ANE-NPR received additional funding to supplement the FY22 funding\
    \ to bring the 36 awardees closer to their FY22 requested funded level. The ANE-NPR\
    \ program will close in 2023. \n\nANE-NPRIP: In Academic Year 2021-2022, the ANE-NPRIP\
    \ Program trained 104 NP residents, 24% of whom were from underrepresented minority\
    \ and/or disadvantaged backgrounds. One hundred percent of the NP residents received\
    \ training in primary care settings and medically underserved communities, and\
    \ 31% received training in rural settings. All NP residents participated in trainings\
    \ related to COVID-19, health equity, behavioral health integration in primary\
    \ care and trained in a setting that offer telehealth. In FY 2022, additional\
    \ funding was received to make supplemental funding awards to the 10 ANE-NPRIP\
    \ awardees to establish/expand/maintain optional community-based nurse practitioner\
    \ fellowship programs (ANE-NPRIP projects), with a preference for those in FQHCs,\
    \ for practicing postgraduate nurse practitioners in primary/behavioral health.\
    \ The ANE-NPRIP program will close in 2023. \n\nANE-NPRF: In FY 2023, HRSA combined\
    \ the current Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner Residency Program\
    \ (ANE-NPR) and Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner Residency Integration\
    \ Program (ANE-NPRIP) into one program, the Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner\
    \ Residency and Fellowship (ANE-NPRF) Program. In FY 23 HRSA intends to make 45\
    \ new awards for the ANE-NPRF Program. \n\nMatCare: For FY 23, HRSA estimates\
    \ approximately $8,000,000 to be available annually to fund approximately 8 award\
    \ recipients."
  year: '2022'
- description: "ANEW: In Academic Year 2022-2023, awardees of the ANEW Program trained\
    \ 2,668 nursing students, more than one half of whom were underrepresented minorities\
    \ and/or from disadvantaged backgrounds (65%). The ANEW program produced 1,201\
    \ graduates who were ready to enter the health care workforce. To provide clinical\
    \ training experiences to nursing students, grantees partnered with 1,863 clinical\
    \ training sites (primary care settings (73%), medically underserved communities\
    \ (71%), and/or rural areas (30%). ANEW awardees offered developed or enhanced\
    \ 983 courses for trainees, provided 190 continuing education courses to practicing\
    \ professionals, and offered 3 faculty and preceptor development programs. In\
    \ FY24 ANEW awarded funding to 56 awardees.  \n\nANE-NPRF: In FY 2023, HRSA combined\
    \ the current Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner Residency Program\
    \ (ANE-NPR) and Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner Residency Integration\
    \ Program (ANE-NPRIP) into one program, the Advanced Nursing Education Nurse Practitioner\
    \ Residency and Fellowship (ANE-NPRF) Program. In FY 23 HRSA made 45 new awards\
    \ for the ANE-NPRF Program for a total investment of $30,008,851. \n\nMatCare:\
    \ For FY 23, HRSA awarded $8,000,000 to 10 new award recipients. \n\nANE-SANE:\
    \ In Academic Year 2022-2023, awardees from the ANE-SANE program trained 3,220,\
    \ students and produced 632 graduates. The majority of trainees were from a rural\
    \ and/or disadvantaged background (67%). 64% of SANE trainees received their training\
    \ in medically underserved communities and about 19% of these trainees received\
    \ training in rural areas. 23% percent of students participated in health equity\
    \ training and approximately 22% participated in COVID-19 related training. The\
    \ ANE-SANE awardees partnered with 293 clinical training sites (primary care settings\
    \ 16%, medically underserved communities 64), and/or rural areas 32%). SANE awardees\
    \ developed and/or enhanced 222 courses. Over 40% of the 2022-2023 graduates are\
    \ currently employed in Medically Underserved Community, 6% employed in Primary\
    \ Care Settings, and 19% employed in Rural Areas. In FY24, ANE-SANE awarded funding\
    \ to 30 awardees.  \n\nANE-NPR: In Academic Year 2022-2023, the ANE-NPR program\
    \ trained 373 nurse practitioner (NP) residents and graduated 265 NP residents.\
    \ Most of the NP residents received training in medically underserved communities\
    \ (97%) and primary care settings (98%), while others received training in a rural\
    \ setting (39%). A majority of the NP residents participated in trainings related\
    \ to COVID-19 (88%), Health Equity/Social Determinants of Health (95%), substance\
    \ use treatment (88%) and/or trained in a setting that offered telehealth (89%)\
    \ and had behavioral health integrated in primary care (90%). Seventy-three percent\
    \ of AY 2022-2023 graduates were employed in a primary care setting, 77% were\
    \ employed in a medically underserved community, 23% were employed in a rural\
    \ area, and 57% in FQHCs or look-alikes. The ANE-NPR program closed in 2023. \n\
    \ \nANE-NPRIP: In Academic Year 2022-2023, the ANE-NPRIP Program trained 103 NP\
    \ residents, 50% of whom were from underrepresented minority and/or disadvantaged\
    \ backgrounds, with 54 graduates. Most of the NP residents received training in\
    \ medically underserved communities (97%), and primary care settings (98%), while\
    \ others received training in a rural setting (33%). One hundred percent of the\
    \ NP residents participated in trainings related to COVID-19, Telehealth and Health\
    \ Equity/Social Determinants of Health, substance use treatment training (88%)\
    \ and had training in behavioral health integrated in primary care (97%). Seventy-six\
    \ percent of AY 2022-2023 graduates were employed in a primary care setting, 45%\
    \ were employed in a medically underserved community, 5% were employed in a rural\
    \ area, 42% in FQHCs or look-alikes, and 16% were employed in community behavioral\
    \ health/mental health centers. The ANE-NPRIP program closed in 2023."
  year: '2023'
rules_regulations: All administrative and audit requirements and the cost principles
  that govern Federal monies associated with this activity will be subject to the
  Uniform Guidance 2 CFR 200 as codified by HHS at 45 CFR 75. HRSA awards are also
  subject to the requirements of the HHS Grants Policy Statement (HHS GPS) that are
  applicable based on recipient type and purpose of award. The HHS GPS is available
  at https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/hhs-grants-policy-statement-october-2024.pdf.
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/89c18405fa41407381a31efa530b485c/view
sub-agency: Health Resources and Services Administration
title: Advanced Nursing Education Workforce Grant Program
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=0e269df739d80e59088c2fed8123adfb
---
