---
agency: Department of Health and Human Services
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized lndian Tribal Governments
- Local (includes State-designated lndian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Quasi-public nonprofit institution/organization
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Project Grants
- Project Grants
authorizations:
- text: Section 747 of the Public Health Service Act (42 U.S.C. 293k) as amended by
    the CARES Act (P.L. 116-136).
  url: null
beneficiary_types:
- Local
- Other private institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- Quasi-public nonprofit organization
- State
categories:
- Education - Health Education and Training
- Health - Education and Training
cfda: '93.884'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=93.884
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: 'The overarching purpose of the PCTE Program is to strengthen the primary
  care workforce by supporting enhanced training for future primary care. Activities
  include: (1) plan, develop, and operate a program that provides training experiences
  in new competencies, such as providing training relevant to providing care through
  patient-centered medical homes, developing tools and curricula relevant to patient-centered
  medical homes, and providing continuing education to primary care providers relevant
  to patient-centered medical homes; (2) plan, develop and operate a program for the
  training of physicians who plan to teach in family medicine, general internal medicine,
  or general pediatrics; (3) plan, develop, and operate a program for the training
  of physicians or physician assistants teaching in community-based settings; (4)
  provide need-based financial assistance in the form of traineeships and fellowships
  to students, residents, practicing physicians or other medical personnel, who are
  participants in any such program, who plan to work in, teach, or conduct research
  in family medicine, general internal medicine, general pediatrics, or physician
  assistant education; and (5) plan, develop and operate joint degree programs to
  provide interdisciplinary and interprofessional graduate training in public health
  and other health professions to provide training in environmental health, infectious
  disease, disease prevention and health promotion, epidemiological studies and injury
  control.'
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":41224323.0,"usa_spending_actual":45223797.75},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":58480666.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":67425098.82},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":51827926.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":56178845.77}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2022","outlay":4480011.31,"obligation":8897450.69},{"x":"2023","outlay":19710708.82,"obligation":51933970.4},{"x":"2024","outlay":800505.18,"obligation":6244670.0}]'
permalink: /program/93.884.html
popular_name: Primary Care Training and Enhancement; PCTE
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "Fiscal Year 2016: In Academic Year 2015-2016, the Primary Care Training\
    \ and Enhancement program supported the training of 1,037 medical residents, 798\
    \ medical students and 575 physician assistant students. The PCTE grantees partnered\
    \ with 437 healthcare delivery sites to provide clinical training experiences\
    \ for 2,232 students and advanced trainees from a variety of professions and disciplines\
    \ incorporating interprofessional team-based approaches. Sixty-five percent of\
    \ the clinical sites were located in medically underserved communities, 60.2%\
    \ were in primary care settings and 42.3% were in rural areas. Funds were used\
    \ to deliver 74 unique continuing education courses to 535 faculty members and\
    \ practicing providers and to develop and implement 154 different courses, reaching\
    \ 6,756 trainees. Faculty development was provided to 2,647 primary care faculty\
    \ physicias through 132 structured and unstructured faculty-focused training programs\
    \ and activities. \r\n\r\nFiscal Year 2016: The Academic Unit-Primary Care Training\
    \ and Enhancement program funded six cooperative agreements. The awardees are\
    \ completing 12 research proposals dealing with integration of primary care into\
    \ behavioral health, integration of primary care into oral health, training in\
    \ rural areas, training for the needs of vulnerable populations, training in the\
    \ social determinants of health and diversity in health workforce. They have developed\
    \ and implemented 6 individual websites and are developing communities of practice.\r\
    \n\r\nFaculty Development in Primary Care: no data available\r\nPre-doctoral Training\
    \ in Primary Care: no data available\r\nPhysician Assistant Training in Primary\
    \ Care: no data available\r\nResidency Training in Primary Care: no data available\r\
    \nInterdisciplinary and Interprofessional Joint Graduate Degree: no data available\
    \ \r\n \r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: ':  In Academic Year 2016--2017, the Primary Care Training and Enhancement
    program supported the training of 2,098 primary care medicine residents and fellows,
    3,109 medical students and 1,138 physician assistant students.  Of the PCTE trainees,
    23.4% were from underrepresented minority backgrounds and 34.2% were from disadvantaged
    backgrounds.  During academic year 2016-2017 1,647 trainees graduated from HRSA
    supported PCTE projects (those funded in 2015 and 2016).  The PCTE grantees partnered
    with  707 healthcare delivery sites to provide clinical training experiences for
    7,344 students and advanced trainees from a variety of professions and disciplines
    incorporating interprofessional team-based approaches. Sixty-three.six percent
    of the clinical sites were located in medically underserved communities, 61.7%
    were in primary care settings and 29.7% were in rural areas. Funds were used to
    deliver 100 unique continuing education courses to 2,295 faculty members and practicing
    providers and to develop, enhance and implement 1592different curricular activities,
    reaching 16,138  trainees. Grantees supported 245 faculty-focused training programs
    and activities, reaching 4,217 primary care faculty physicians.  About 25% of
    training sites offered interprofessional team-based care experiences.  PCTE faculty
    delivered 212 courses, workshops and other trainings focused on primary care topics
    to 2,242 trainees, who were most commonly internal medicine residents and medical
    students.'
  year: '2017'
- description: 'The PCTE programs supported various types of primary care training
    programs for 9,481 health professions students, residents, and fellows including:
    2,404 primary care medicine residents and fellows, 4,379 medical students, 1,190
    physician assistant students, 161 primary care medicine faculty, and 1,347 students
    from collaborating interprofessional disciplines (includes pharmacy students,
    nursing students, dental students, psychology graduate students, and occupational
    therapy students).  Approximately 29 percent of trainees were from disadvantaged
    backgrounds, and approximately 19 percent of trainees self-identified as underrepresented
    minorities in the health professions.  Of the 619 individuals who received stipend
    support, approximately 44 percent of trainees received training in substance use
    treatment. Additionally, nearly half of funded trainees

    (46 percent) received specific training in medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
    for opioid use disorder.  PCTE awardees collaborated with 903 health care delivery
    sites to provide clinical training experiences to trainees. The most frequently
    used types of clinical training sites included: Physician’s offices (16 percent),
    Hospitals (16 percent), Ambulatory practice sites (12 percent), Community Health
    Centers (6 percent), Federally Qualified Health Centers or look-alikes (2 percent),
    and Rural health clinics (3 percent).  Among 903 health care delivery sites, 17
    percent offered telehealth services, 37 percent offered substance use treatment
    services, 23 percent offered opioid use treatment services, and 21 percent offered
    MAT services for opioid use disorder. About 62 percent of training sites offered
    interprofessional team-based care experiences. PCTE awardees further developed
    or enhanced and implemented 955 different curricular activities, which reached
    29,944 trainees.  PCTE awardees delivered 173 unique continuing education courses
    that focused on emerging issues in the field of primary care to 5,263 faculty
    members and community providers.  Awardees supported 360 faculty-focused training
    programs and activities, reaching 6,694

    primary care faculty physicians.'
  year: '2018'
- description: 'In Academic Year, 2018-2109, the PCTE programs supported various types
    of primary care training programs for 13,094 health professions students, residents,
    and fellows including: 2,566 primary care medicine residents and fellows, 6,482
    medical students, 1,922 physician assistant students, 107 primary care medicine
    faculty, and 2,017 students from collaborating interprofessional disciplines (includes
    pharmacy students, nursing students, dental students, psychology graduate students,
    and occupational therapy students).  Approximately 29 percent of trainees were
    from disadvantaged backgrounds, and approximately 17 percent of trainees self-identified
    as underrepresented minorities in the health professions.  Of the 469 individuals
    who received stipend support, approximately 60 percent of trainees received training
    in substance use treatment. Additionally, nearly half of funded trainees (51 percent)
    received specific training in medication-assisted treatment (MAT) for opioid use
    disorder.  PCTE awardees collaborated with 997 health care delivery sites to provide
    clinical training experiences to trainees. The most frequently used types of clinical
    training sites included: Physician’s offices (12 percent), Hospitals (17 percent),
    Ambulatory practice sites (17 percent), Community Health Centers (6 percent),
    Federally Qualified Health Centers or look-alikes (12 percent), and Rural health
    clinics (4 percent).  Among 997 health care delivery sites, 16 percent offered
    telehealth services, 35 percent offered substance use treatment services, 23 percent
    offered opioid use treatment services, and 22 percent offered MAT services for
    opioid use disorder. About 59 percent of training sites offered interprofessional
    team-based care experiences. PCTE awardees further developed or enhanced and implemented
    1,220 different curricular activities, which reached 35,086 trainees.  PCTE awardees
    delivered 197 unique continuing education courses that focused on emerging issues
    in the field of primary care to 7,177 faculty members and community providers.  Awardees
    supported 404 faculty-focused training programs and activities, reaching 7,427
    primary care faculty physicians.


    Academic Year 2019-2020:  No current data available.'
  year: '2019'
- description: 'In Academic Year, 2019-2020, the PCTE programs supported various types
    of primary care training programs for 14,194 health professions students, residents,
    and fellows. Out of this number of trainees, 4,137 were from disadvantaged background,
    2,708 from underrepresented minorities, and 1,915 from rural background.


    Also, in Academic Year 2019-2020 out of the 14,194 trainees supported by the PCTE
    program 3,796 graduated, including 613 from underrepresented minorities, 1,101
    from disadvantaged backgrounds, and 551 from rural backgrounds.

    In Academic Year 2019-2020, the TPCC program supported 151 Champion fellows, of
    which 34 fellows self-identified as underrepresented minorities in health professions
    and 35 fellows from disadvantaged backgrounds. Of the 151 trained fellows, the
    TPCC programs graduated 52 fellows, approximately 13 identified as underrepresented
    minorities in health professions and 15 from disadvantaged backgrounds. Of the
    151 individuals who received stipend support, approximately 45 percent of trainees
    received training in substance use treatment and 44 percent of trainees received
    training in opioid use treatment. Additionally, nearly half of funded trainees
    (49 percent) received specific training in integrated behavioral health in primary
    care.'
  year: '2020'
- description: 'In Academic Year, 2020-2021, PCTE awardees trained 1,937 primary care
    residents and fellows, 5,885 medical students, 1,323 students in physician assistant
    programs, 1,242 students from collaborating interprofessional disciplines (including
    pharmacy students, psychology students, dental students, and nursing students),
    and 64 faculty members, for a total of 10,451 trainees, 2,750 of whom completed
    their programs by the end of the academic year. PCTE awardees delivered 85 unique
    continuing education courses to 3,478 faculty members and current practicing providers.
    Primary Care Training and Enhancement (PCTE) Training Primary Care Champions (TPCC):
    In Academic Year 2020-2021, PCTE- TPCC provided fellowships to 161 physicians
    and 32 physician assistants. Among the physicians, 88 specialized in family medicine,
    37 specialized in internal medicine, 27 specialized in pediatrics, and 9 specialized
    in internal medicine/pediatrics. In Academic Year 2020-2021, the PCTE-IBHPC program
    provided training to 1,849 individuals. Nearly 70% of individuals received training
    in opioid use treatment, and 23% received training in health equity/the social
    determinants of health. The PCTE-PA program trained 953 physician assistants (PAs),
    52% of whom were underrepresented minorities or from disadvantaged backgrounds.
    PAs received training in integrated behavioral health in primary care (83%), substance
    use treatment (81%), health equity/the social determinants of health (80%), opioid
    use treatment (70%), and COVID-19 (49%). The PCTE-RTPC program trained 428 individuals,
    including residents in family medicine (85%), pediatrics (11%), and internal medicine/pediatrics
    (4%). Participants received training on priority topics such as substance use
    treatment COVID-19, integrated behavioral health in primary care, and health equity/the
    social determinants of health.  The Primary Care Training and Enhancement (PCTE)
    (cohort 16) program issued awards to 33 applicants for a 5-year project period
    starting July 1, 2021. The Primary Care Training and Enhancement – Physician Assistant
    Rural Training Program (PCTE-PAR) issued awards to 11 applicants for a 5-year
    project period starting July 1, 2022.'
  year: '2021'
- description: "In Academic Year, 2021-2022, PCTE programs  trained 12,178 health\
    \ professionals, residents, students, and faculty to strengthen the public health\
    \ workforce. A total of 2,917 graduated or completed their training program. Trainees\
    \ from other programs within the PCTE portfolio included over 2,500 clinicians\
    \ integrating behavioral health and primary care.  Forty percent of these clinicians\
    \ were from disadvantaged backgrounds.  Four hundred and ninety-six residents\
    \ were learning to practice comprehensive, primary care medicine in medically\
    \ underserved and/or rural areas. Three hundred and forty-five community prevention\
    \ and maternal health residents and fellows reached over 376,000 patients. Twenty-three\
    \ faculty expanded the capacity to train primary care providers. \n\nPrimary Care\
    \ Training and Enhancement (PCTE): Training Primary Care Champions (TPCC): In\
    \ Academic Year 2021-2022, PCTE- TPCC provided fellowships to 139 physicians and\
    \ 24 physician assistants. Of the 139 trained fellows, 36 percent self-identified\
    \ as underrepresented minorities, 18 percent were from disadvantaged backgrounds,\
    \ and approximately 29 percent from a rural background.  Of the 87 graduates,\
    \ 31 percent self-identified as underrepresented minorities and 22 percent were\
    \ from disadvantaged backgrounds. TPCC fellows received training in health equity\
    \ and social determinants of health (76 percent), opioid use treatment (40 percent),\
    \ substance use treatment (29 percent), integrated behavioral health in primary\
    \ care (27 percent), and COVID-19 (18 percent). In addition, 40 percent trained\
    \ in a setting that offered telehealth. \n \nPrimary Care Training and Enhancement\
    \ (PCTE): Integrating Behavioral Health and Primary Care (IBHPC) Program: In Academic\
    \ Year 2021-2022, PCTE-IBHPC developed courses that included behavioral health\
    \ , cultural  competencies and health disparities, leadership and management.\
    \ Trainees served populations with mental illness, older adults, and individuals\
    \ with disabilities. \nPrimary Care Training and Enhancement (PCTE) - Physician\
    \ Assistant (PA) Program: In Academic Year 2021-2022, the PCTE-PA program trained\
    \ 1,902 physician assistants (PAs), 50 percent of whom were underrepresented minorities\
    \ and 43% were from disadvantaged backgrounds. There were 518 graduates.  Three\
    \ hundred and fifty-four received the SAMHSA waiver to prescribe medication assisted\
    \ treatment.  One thousand three hundred and fifty one PA students received MAT\
    \ training for SUD/OUD.\nPrimary Care Training and Enhancement (PCTE) – Residency\
    \ Training in Primary Care:  \nIn Academic Year 2021-2022, the PCTE-RTPC program\
    \ trained 496 individuals.  Twenty percent of PCTE-RTPC residents were from disadvantaged\
    \ and 24 percent from rural backgrounds. There were 157 residents who completed\
    \ their residency training.  Eighty five of the graduates report employed or practicing\
    \ in a primary care setting. In addition, the residency programs developed or\
    \ enhanced 614 courses. \n\nPrimary Care Training and Enhancement - Community\
    \ Prevention and Maternal Health:   \nIn Academic Year 2021-2022, the PCTE-CPMH\
    \ program trained 345 individuals.  Thirty-two  percent of were from disadvantaged,\
    \ 26 percent were from underrepresented minorities, and  sent  and 25 percent\
    \ from rural backgrounds. There were 138 graduates.\n\nPrimary Care Training and\
    \ Enhancement – Physician Assistant Rural Training Program (PCTE-PAR): The program\
    \ will report performance data in future Congressional Justifications.  \nPrimary\
    \ Care Training and Enhancement – Mental and Behavioral Health (PCTE-RTMB): The\
    \ program will report performance data in future Congressional Justifications.\
    \   \n \nPrimary Care Training and Enhancement – Language and Disability Access\
    \ Program (PCTE-LDA): The program will report performance data in future Congressional\
    \ Justifications."
  year: '2022'
rules_regulations: All administrative and audit requirements and the cost principles
  that govern Federal monies associated with this activity will be subject to the
  Uniform Guidance 2 CFR 200 as codified by HHS at 45 CFR 75. HRSA awards are also
  subject to the requirements of the HHS Grants Policy Statement (HHS GPS) that are
  applicable based on recipient type and purpose of award. The HHS GPS is available
  at http://www.hrsa.gov/grants/hhsgrantspolicy.pdf.
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/27c2790b435f46a684eec64a20d12365/view
sub-agency: Health Resources and Services Administration
title: Primary Care Training and Enhancement
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=89072f704f76e8fa99fcdd49ac63acdb
---
