---
agency: Department of Homeland Security
applicant_types:
- Federally Recognized lndian Tribal Governments
- Local (includes State-designated lndian Tribes, excludes institutions of higher
  education and hospitals
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- State (includes District of Columbia, public institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Direct Loans
- Guaranteed / Insured Loans
- Project Grants
- Provision of Specialized Services
- Sale, Exchange, or Donation of Property or Goods
authorizations:
- text: Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2022. Pub. L. 117, 103.
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/117/public/103
- text: Pub. L. DHS Appropriations Act, 2022, 117-103.
  url: null
beneficiary_types:
- Federal
- Federally Recognized Indian Tribal Governments
- Individual/Family
- Local
- Native American Organizations
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Profit organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- State
categories:
- Disaster Prevention and Relief - Emergency Preparedness, Civil Defense
- Law, Justice and Legal Services - Law Enforcement - Research, Education, Training
cfda: '97.108'
fiscal_year: '2022'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=97.108
layout: program
objective: DHS S&T utilizes financial assistance agreements to provide evidence-based
  scientific and technical expertise to inform policies and directly address a broad
  spectrum of current and emerging threats. The purpose of these financial assistance
  agreements is to develop high quality data and advanced capabilities that not only
  inform policy and operational objectives, but also lead to significant public benefits
  that span multiple domains areas (e.g., first responders, terrorism and targeted
  violence practitioners, soft target security, and human trafficking.) DHS S&T utilizes
  97.108 to issue grants and cooperative agreements for a diverse set of requirements
  from developing tools and capabilities for the first responder community to defend
  and mitigate the health risk associated with their exposure to chemical, biological,
  physical, or radiological elements; to better understanding the nature of terrorism,
  targeted violence, insider threats and human trafficking. DHS S&T aims to conduct
  basic and applied research to better understand an evolving threat landscape and
  to provide these resources to S/L/T/T partners and the general public with the goal
  of enhancing public safety while preventing acts of violence from impacting our
  communities. S&T research will enable policy makers and operational end-users to
  make informed decisions to divert vulnerable individuals, prevent potential offenders,
  mitigate vulnerabilities, and enhance community resilience in the face of various
  threats.
obligations: '[{"x":"2022","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":475000.0,"usa_spending_actual":729412.25},{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":12756651.0,"usa_spending_actual":4275172.72},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":1472893.0,"sam_actual":0.0,"usa_spending_actual":11452529.14}]'
permalink: /program/97.108.html
popular_name: ''
results:
- description: "Production prototype base ensemble garments will be delivered by both\
    \ of the cooperative agreement recipients.  These will be provided to agencies\
    \ that represent the various first responder disciplines from geographical diverse\
    \ regions of the country for extended wear testing.   1) APCO provided support\
    \ on the P25 CAP reorganization for DHS review and approval and a recommendation\
    \ to describe the relationships among the new user-based Leadership Group and\
    \ its committee structure, the TIA TR-8 process and organization, the P25 CAP\
    \ process, and the national public safety associations and federal entities involved,\
    \ as well as the operational aspects of the future process and organization. In\
    \ addition, to providing support services for Regional Planning Committees (RPCs)\
    \ and the National Regional Planning Council (NRPC); they restructured and updated\
    \ the Computer Assisted Pre-Coordination Resource and Database (CAPRAD) System\
    \ which aids in the management of the public safety radio frequency spectrum.\
    \  APCO International provided a centralized forum for information sharing directly\
    \ related to the first responder community and provides opportunities to analyze\
    \ and correlate information among the first responder agencies.  Additionally,\
    \ APCO International provided:\r\n•\tMigrated existing CAPRAD to new platform\
    \ to meet user requirements;\r\n•\tAdded security features and improved user friendly\
    \ interface at the request of users;\r\n•\tDeveloped a single central repository\
    \ to address the 800 MHz regional planning committee’s request to have access\
    \ to an adjacent region’s planning process or applications;\r\n•\tIncorporated\
    \ part of the NCC’s recommendation to establish a nationwide CAPRAD database that\
    \ all 700 MHz regions could utilize as a pre-planning and pre-coordination tool\
    \ for 700 MHz frequency band public safety band applicants.\r\n•\tCompleted the\
    \ cost analysis and developed the best system upgrade options for the CAPRAD program\
    \ and meeting objectives 1 – 16 from the original grant.\r\n\r\n2) Both award\
    \ recipients completed the material testing, material selection, and garment design\
    \ for the prototype base ensemble.  Due to unexpected delays in the National Fire\
    \ Protection Association (NFPA) 1975 certification process by their industrial\
    \ partners, garments were not NFPA certified or manufactured in FY 2016 for distribution\
    \ to first responders for wear testing and evaluation.  This is anticipated to\
    \ occur in FY 2017. \r\n\r\n3) Testing of baseline turnout gear to characterize\
    \ its’ performance was accomplished for the Smoke and Particulate Resistant Structural\
    \ Firefighter Turnout (SRT) project.  The main goal for this project is to develop\
    \ a prototype firefighter turnout ensemble system to enhance protection against\
    \ smoke and toxic vapors during and after fire suppression missions, while maintaining\
    \ functionality and not degrading comfort. Prototype designs that incorporates\
    \ features to prevent smoke and particulate infiltration through the turnout gear\
    \ interfaces were developed.  Initial testing of one prototype design showed superior\
    \ performance for particulate infiltration compared to the baseline turnout gear.\
    \  Work is continuing to refine the prototype designs.  \r\n\r\n4) A new project\
    \ to provide “Respiration Protection for Firefighters during Overhaul Operations”\
    \ was initiated.  The project goal is to develop a respiratory protection system\
    \ for use by firefighters during overhaul operations.  After a structure fire\
    \ has been suppressed firefighters conduct overhaul operations to extinguish any\
    \ smoldering hot spots. Initially firefighters wear their self-contained breathing\
    \ apparatus (SCBA), but commonly swap the SCBA for a particulate filter mask when\
    \ the carbon monoxide (CO) concentration drops below 35 parts per million (ppm).\
    \  However, particulate masks do not provide protection against chemical vapors\
    \ and there is no correlation between the CO concentration and that of other toxic\
    \ contaminants.   The filter that will be developed will be available for use\
    \ with equipment from any manufacturer through the use of a standard STANAG 40\
    \ mm connector.  The goal of the new system is to be much lighter and more comfortable\
    \ than an SCBA, durable, require minimum maintenance, have low operating cost,\
    \ and be reasonably priced. \r\n\r\n5) The text to 9-1-1 project developed technology\
    \ solutions to initiate a screen with emergency 9-1-1 text on a translator’s computer\
    \ along with a VoIP (voice over internet protocol) voice call to connect the translator\
    \ and responding 9-1-1 operator in real time.  An application program interface\
    \ (API) was developed to enable the connection of language service providers (LSPs)\
    \ who conduct real time translations of texts and the 9-1-1 center operators who\
    \ receive the texts directly on their screens from the wireless carriers.  Machine\
    \ translation of emergency texts was developed concurrently, and will be benchmarked\
    \ for performance against human translators.  \r\n\r\n6) National Information\
    \ Sharing Consortium (NISC) accomplished:\r\n•\tKick Off Meeting and Work Plan\
    \ completed for grant award made at end of FY15 (9/14/15)\r\n•\tConducted CHECKPOINT\
    \ 16 on May 11, 2016, a multi-national information sharing exercise that tested\
    \ and evaluated situational awareness and decision support tools for the emergency\
    \ management and homeland security communities.  Key highlights included: \r\n\
    o\tParticipation from over 60 individuals from local, state, and federal government\
    \ agencies, state National Guard units, private sector companies, Canadian participants,\
    \ and nonprofit organizations, demonstrating broad interest in the exercise and\
    \ information sharing tools featured.  Following the exercise, several participants\
    \ indicated interest in adopting tools into their own organizations; \r\no\tDevelopment\
    \ and use of the Battle Rhythm Manager, a virtual exercise facilitation tool that\
    \ was made available to all NISC members for their own exercise purposes and was\
    \ an important facilitation tool during the January 23, 2017 New Orleans Flood\
    \ Experiment.\r\no\tDevelopment of a preliminary plan for implementing REBOUND\
    \ 17, a multi-phase information sharing exercise to increase awareness of and\
    \ evaluate information sharing tools and best practices for the emergency management\
    \ and homeland security community.\r\n•\tAdded three information sharing tools\
    \ to the NISC Member Portal, including the Battle Rhythm Widget, the CHECKPOINT\
    \ 16 Exercise Viewer, and the Mutual Aid Resource Planner and providing trainings\
    \ on how to integrate tools into members’ operational environments.\r\n•\tHired\
    \ NISC’s Executive Director, to serve in a volunteer capacity to lead fundraising\
    \ efforts, NISC operations, and strategic activities to ensure long-term sustainability\
    \ of the NISC.\r\n•\tReceived a Gold Sponsorship from G&H International Services,\
    \ Inc. to provide continued staff and technical support for the organization.\r\
    \n"
  year: '2016'
- description: "The Smoke and Particulate Resistant Structural Firefighter Turnout\
    \ gear (SRT) project was completed.  This included developmental testing by firefighters\
    \ to determine what prototype turnout configuration meets the requirements of\
    \ the project, while minimizing any change to normal structural firefighter concept\
    \ of operations. Lion, PPE, the developer’s industrial partner for this effort,\
    \ obtained National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) 1971 certification for\
    \ the SRT garments. An Operation Field Assessment (OFA) was conducted by DHS S&T\
    \ in August 2017 at the FEMA National Fire Academy in Emmitsburg, MD.  A “soft\
    \ roll-out” of the SRT garment occurred on November 1, 2017 by Lion, PPE.  Lion\
    \ had a full commercial release occurred at the Fire Department Instructor’s Conference\
    \ (FDIC) in April 2018.  The SRT garments are being marketed by Lion as the REDZONE™\
    \ Contaminate Control package.  \nNFPA 1975 certification for the prototype base\
    \ ensemble garments was obtained by the industrial partners for both of the base\
    \ ensemble award recipients in August 2017. The Next Generation First Responder\
    \ (NGFR) program received 100 NFPA certified garment ensembles (i.e. shirt and\
    \ pants) for their “Spiral 2” exercise in August 2017.  One hundred fifty prototype\
    \ ensembles from each industrial partner were received in early FY 2018 for wear\
    \ testing by law enforcement, fire, and EMS personnel across the United States,\
    \ and in the UK and Sweden.  Feedback from the wear testers will be provided to\
    \ the industrial partners so they can make any required modifications to the garments\
    \ before commercialization.   \nTesting and characterization of potential filter\
    \ media for use in the “Respiration Protection for Firefighters during Overhaul\
    \ Operations” project continued during FY 2017. There is currently no air filter\
    \ canister that is specifically designed for firefighting overhaul activities,\
    \ so firefighters may not have the best level of protection of hazardous chemical\
    \ which are present during overhaul activities.  Both particulate filtration media\
    \ and charcoal filtration (to remove hazardous vapors) were investigated, with\
    \ the goal of developing a filter canister optimized for removing the hazardous\
    \ chemicals that are present during overhaul activities.    \nCongress legislated\
    \ P25 CAP to ensure LMR equipment complies with P25 standards for interoperability\
    \ across suppliers. The P25 CAP is a partnership of DHS’s Office for Interoperability\
    \ and Compatibility (OIC), industry, and the first responder community. The initial\
    \ program focused on the Common Air Interface, which allows for over-the-air compatibility\
    \ between radios and tower equipment. To continue improving the P25 CAP process,\
    \ OIC developed a Compliance Assessment Bulletin (CAB) for testing of the Inter\
    \ Sub-system Interface (ISSI) as part of the P25 CAP. However, P25 CAP recognized\
    \ laboratories have been reluctant to expand their testing beyond the Common Air\
    \ Interface (CAI) to include the ISSI. In part, the reluctance can be attributed\
    \ to a seeming lack of financial benefit for the labs to invest in the resources\
    \ needed to conduct ISSI testing. More recently, OIC has initiated the development\
    \ of a CAB for testing of the Console Sub-System Interface (CSSI). It is believed\
    \ that the laboratory requirements would be very similar for a participating laboratory\
    \ to conduct testing for both of these interfaces. OIC has an opportunity to effect\
    \ change in this area. OIC is interested in the capability of testing and evaluating\
    \ ISSI and CSSI equipment from the various vendors. OIC will share its existing\
    \ knowledge on the topic and refer to others with ISSI/CSSI testing expertise\
    \ and work closely with the P25 CAP Advisory Panel members and other US Federal\
    \ law enforcement organizations."
  year: '2017'
- description: "As previously mentioned, the Smoke and Particulate Resistant Structural\
    \ Firefighter Turnout gear (SRT) garments were commercially released by Lion PPE\
    \ under the “REDZONE™ Contaminant Control Package” tradename.  Initial response\
    \ by fire departments has been very positive.  \nWear testing for the base ensemble\
    \ garments began in FY 2018.  Garments are still being distributed to some first\
    \ responder agencies due to unexpected sizing and shipment/distribution issues.\
    \  Feedback from the wear testers will be provided to both vendors and their industrial\
    \ partners so they have the opportunity to make any modifications to the garments\
    \ before they are commercialized.  \nSelection of both particulate and charcoal\
    \ filter media for use in the “Respiration Protection for Firefighters during\
    \ Overhaul Operations” project continued during FY 2018.  Modifications to the\
    \ selected charcoal mixtures are being made to characterize performance of the\
    \ mixtures against hazardous vapors found at the scene of structural fires and\
    \ during the NIOSH certification tests.  A rubber “boot” that fits over filter\
    \ canisters and contains protection against large particulate matter is also being\
    \ developed.  Clogging of the filter canister’s particulate filter is often the\
    \ limiting factor for the useful life of the canister.  The addition of a cleanable,\
    \ reusable filter for protection against large particulates (similar to the foam\
    \ air filter for a lawn mower, etc.) should extend the useable lifetime of filter\
    \ canisters and will be able to be used with any filter canister system.  The\
    \ work on the “Overhaul” filter canister system is anticipated to be completed\
    \ in late FY 2018.  An S&T Operational Fire Assessment (OFA) is scheduled to occur\
    \ in early FY 2019.  The OFA provides an opportunity for firefighters to test\
    \ the developed technology under controlled and/or simulated conditions to ensure\
    \ that it meets operational requirements and does not interfere with normal operational\
    \ tasks.     \nIn FY 2018, an Award for the development of respiratory protection\
    \ for wildland firefighters was made.  Currently, wildland firefighters either\
    \ have no respiratory protection, or use other techniques and methods (such as\
    \ a wet bandana) to provide respiratory protection.  While these other methods\
    \ may provide some protection against large particulates, they do not protect\
    \ against the fine particulates that are most damaging to the lungs, or against\
    \ the hazardous chemical vapors that are present.  The project was initiated in\
    \ April 2018, with a scheduled conclusion in September 2019.  Initial concepts\
    \ are being developed for a scarf-like structure that is light weight, easy to\
    \ carry, and is comfortable to wear for extended periods of time.  The charcoal\
    \ mixture development work that was conducted for the “Respiration Protection\
    \ for Firefighters during Overhaul Operations” project will be leveraged for the\
    \ “Wildland Firefighter Respiratory Protection” project.  The final charcoal mixture\
    \ developed for the “Overhaul” project will be used as the starting point of the\
    \ investigation of an optimized filtration system for the “Wildland” project.\
    \ \nIn FY 2018, an Award for the development of a durable glove for use in hoist\
    \ rescue operations was made.  Currently rescue hoist personnel are using a variety\
    \ of gloves to guide the wire hoist cable during rescue missions.  The weighted\
    \ moving cable causes severe degradation of the gloves, often requiring the rescue\
    \ hoist personnel to frequently change gloves, sometimes daily. The goal of this\
    \ project is to develop a glove that will provide the required levels of protection\
    \ and durability for rescue hoist personnel, without causing damage to the rescue\
    \ cable.   The project was initiated in April 2018, with a scheduled conclusion\
    \ in March 2019.  Base on input from rescue hoist personnel, potential materials\
    \ are being tested for their durability and glove designs are being developed."
  year: '2018'
- description: "During FY 2019, the wear testing for the base ensembles was completed.\
    \  Feedback from the first responders was provided to the appropriate performer\
    \ and their industrial partner.  The majority of the feedback received from first\
    \ responders indicated non-adoption of the base ensemble uniform and it is unlikely\
    \ that this garment will be commercialized.  The Operational Field Assessment\
    \ (OFA) for the “Respiration Protection for Firefighters during Overhaul Operations”\
    \ project was completed in October, 2018.  The project concluded in January, 2020.\
    \  \n\nThe project performer is moving forward in a separate non-related DHS effort\
    \ to produce production quality, Overhaul filters for testing, NIOSH certification\
    \ and obtaining additional feedback on the technology through Voice of the Customer\
    \ (VOC) efforts.  Unfortunately, the Project Performer's manufacturing partner\
    \ decided not to service the firefighting sector of the respiratory protection\
    \ market any longer - the Project Performer has had interest in the Overhaul filter\
    \ system from other manufacturers, to include 3M/Scott and MSA.  The Project Performer\
    \ is currently in discussions with these product manufacturers to determine their\
    \ level of commitment.  The hoist rescue glove project has been extended to FY20\
    \ Q4.  The OFA was completed in FY20 Q1.  The final prototype glove has been developed\
    \ and small modifications are being made by the commercial manufacturer.  Once\
    \ the final prototype glove is completed, it will be provided to rescue hoist\
    \ operators for operational testing.  Work on the wildland firefighter respiratory\
    \ protection project will continue into FY 2021.  The initial concept for the\
    \ scarf-like structure was presented to wildland firefighters to determine what\
    \ materials, construction, fasteners, etc., will be able to be worn comfortably\
    \ for an extended period of time.  Work on the size and shape of the filters,\
    \ charcoal bed depth, filter holding system, material sewed in the filter frame,\
    \ etc., has been performed with close cooperation of the wildland firefighter\
    \ community.  Depending on availability of prototype wildland firefighter respiratory\
    \ devices and wildland firefighters to test the device (which is dependent on\
    \ the number of wildland fires that are occurring at the time), it is possible\
    \ that an Operational Field Assessment (OFA) of the prototype wildland respiratory\
    \ protection device may occur in mid FY 2021.  \n\nB) National Information Sharing\
    \ Consortium (NISC) • Update the NISC Strategic Plan to cover the next 3-5 years\
    \ and focus on strategic priorities to increase revenue and expand business opportunities.\
    \ • Increase NISC membership through outreach and engagement in exercises (e.g.\
    \ CHECKPOINT 17) • Update the NISC publications and guidance for the emergency\
    \ management and healthcare communities. • Continue to solicit sponsorships for\
    \ financial support from other information sharing and geospatial information\
    \ systems organizations. \nC) National Alliance for Public Safety GIS (NAPSG)\
    \ Assess the geospatial information sharing capabilities of the GIS Inventory,\
    \ and its integration, interoperability, and scalability with the DHS Geospatial\
    \ Information Infrastructure (GII) and other existing capabilities • Identify\
    \ common mutual aid information to be shared across organizations • Identify and\
    \ develop guidance for Mutual Aid Resource management dashboards • Test interoperability\
    \ and integration of existing mutual aid technologies and standards-based tools\
    \ \nD) Deliver a protocol for answering text-to-911 calls that includes scripts\
    \ and best practices necessary for effective, accurate and efficient text-to-\
    \ 911 provisioning. Conduct pilot testing of the technology solution to validate\
    \ and refine the preliminary text-to-9-1-1 translation operational requirements\
    \ and to collect data on the number, length, and complexity of text-to-911 interactions\
    \ in Spanish. The pilot is critical to ensure that all overall project deliverables\
    \ are informed by real world Public Safety Answering Point (PSAP) input and field\
    \ tested to validate assumptions and thresholds. The Text-to-911 specification\
    \ and standard will be finalized, and a cost model template and cost basis will\
    \ be developed."
  year: '2019'
- description: "The Phase 2 activities for the cooperative agreement \"Vehicle Warning\
    \ for Early Inspection (VIEW), achieved numerous accomplishments including:\n\
    1) Biweekly calls between Phase 2 awardees and DHS components to discuss work\
    \ plan activities, functional and operational requirements.\n2) Development and\
    \ demonstration of prototype capabilities of under-carriage scanning of vehicles.\
    \  Demonstrations provided via video files and detailed briefings - all during\
    \ COVID pandemic.\n3) One grantee selected to continue research and development\
    \ addressing Phase 3.\n\n•\tThe FAST (SATT) promotional video was delivered to\
    \ NCDMPH in support of the FAST curriculum. Link: https://www.dhs.gov/medialibrary/assets/videos/23360\n\
    •\tDrafted content outline for FAST curriculum(s), both instructor-led and self-taught\n\
    •\tDrafted materials for FAST curriculum\n•\tDrafted and released mobile application\n\
    •\tDrafted learning and delivery aids\n\n•\tPreliminary design modification of\
    \ the Wildland Respirator Protective Device (WRPD) from an air purifying respirator\
    \ (APR) to a powered air purifying respirator (PAPR).\n•\tProvided select members\
    \ of the First Responders Resource Group (FRRG) a prototype version of the WRPD\
    \ in preparation for the virtual Critical Design Review (CDR)\n•\tFacilitated\
    \ a virtual CDR with wildland firefighters to obtain Voice of the Customer feedback\
    \ on the WRPD design.\n•\tModified design of the WRPD to include both a chest-mounted\
    \ and a hip-mounted unit based on feedback received during the CDR\n\n•\tInitial\
    \ glove design presented to first responders responsible for rescue hoist operations\
    \ during the Preliminary Design Review (PDR)\n•\tFeedback received resulted in\
    \ modification of the initial prototype design and inclusion of a wear indicator\
    \ to alert first responders to the need for glove replacement."
  year: '2020'
- description: "The FAST course was released on August 19, 2021 by the American Red\
    \ Cross for the 2021/2022 school year and offered at no charge to high school\
    \ students under the age of 19.  Estimate instructor count to triple by the end\
    \ of the calendar year.  Final operational capability includes an on-line presence\
    \ that serves as an outreach, awareness and central access point to register for\
    \ training, access training content, and purchase training materials.  This effort\
    \ will be fully transitioned on October 14, 2022.  The hip and chest mounted Wildland\
    \ Respirator Protective Devise (WRPD) designs have been finalized and ready for\
    \ assessment by first responders.  Testing has been performed to determine the\
    \ pre-product prototypes operability.  This capability will be thoroughly vetted\
    \ during the OFA.  Demonstrate the WRPD's commercial viability to potential manufacturers\
    \ during the Operational Field Assessment (OFA) which will be facilitated by NUSTL\
    \ at the Harbison State Forest in Columbia, SC.   The OFA will be held on Friday,\
    \ May 20th and multiple wildland firefighters will be in attendance to assess\
    \ the WRPD and provide feedback.  Additionally, personnel from California Fire\
    \ (CAL Fire), US Fire Administration, and the NFPA will be in attendance as observers.\
    \  This effort will be fully transitioned on 30 May 2022.  NUSTL facilitated an\
    \ OFA of  \nthe enhanced hoist rescue glove at the United States Coast Guard Facility\
    \ in Elizabeth City, NC.  Project concluded in FY21 with multiple prototype gloves\
    \ being provided to first responders via a Cooperative Research and Development\
    \ Agreement (CRADA) to assess glove performance and provide feedback to the Project\
    \ Performer.  HDMI began the process of identifying manufacturers for transitioning\
    \ the glove to the commercial market but later decided to cancel the commercialization\
    \ effort.  This effort has concluded.\n\nS&T, along with Harvard T.H. Chan School\
    \ of Public Health, was able to develop and implement a study design to measure\
    \ the impact of the Blue Campaign videos on awareness of human trafficking.  The\
    \ research team fielded a survey instrument to measure the impact of the Blue\
    \ Campaign materials on first responders, specifically to outcomes to 1) awareness\
    \ of human trafficking, 2) awareness of being in a position to detect human trafficking,\
    \ 3) motivation to report cases of human trafficking, 4) knowledge about reporting\
    \ mechanisms, ) opinions on the usefulness of the indicators of human trafficking,\
    \ Data collection was completed in FY21, gathering data from 2000 study participants.\
    \  Five hundred U.S. adults belonging to the job category of first responders\
    \ were recruited into each study.  Findings from this data collection noted that\
    \ Blue Campaign materials appear to be working in raising general awareness, appear\
    \ to be working in reporting knowledge, and appear to be working in raising ability\
    \ of one's position at work to identify possible cases of human trafficking. \
    \ This activity continues into FY22 with research efforts focused on human trafficking\
    \ indicators and expansion of sample frame to capture an assessment of outcomes\
    \ among 1) transportation, 2) first responders, 3) convenience store employees\
    \ and 4) youth worker sectors.  \n\nDHS S&T met with numerous (20+) CBP and FPS\
    \ field agents from across the USA during a 4-day field demonstration of the VIEW\
    \ capability in May, 2021.  These agents were provided a demonstration of the\
    \ VIEW prototype at the Baltimore-Washington Cox-Manheim Auto Auction Facility\
    \ where the performer is currently deploying other VIEW prototypes for commercial\
    \ purposes (50 units ordered in FY21).  This demonstration included the physical\
    \ hardware COTS components, the Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning algorithms\
    \ that flagged under-carriage anomalies (planted items), and digitally captured\
    \ images for archive and future comparison of same and similar vehicles.  Agents\
    \ provided feedback and recommendations based on requirements, anomaly detection\
    \ and operational field experiences.  The vendor consolidated this feedback and\
    \ incorporated changes into the design, development, functionality, and training\
    \ for the final prototype.  The vendor also submitted a provisional Patent application\
    \ including both the baseline VIEW functionality intended for DHS components (CPB,\
    \ FPS) and a number of other imaging modalities.  Additionally, the vendor submitted\
    \ patent applications for anomaly detection for automotive detections as well\
    \ as Machine Learning algorithms for threat and elicit object/substance detection\
    \ for safety and security applications.  In July 2021 the VIEW technology was\
    \ selected by the U.S. Air Force and participated in their AFWERX Base Security\
    \ and Defense Showcase that presented innovative solutions for the USAF Base of\
    \ the Future."
  year: '2021'
- description: "-\tFully transitioned the Student Aged Trauma Training (SATT) to the\
    \ American Red Cross (re-branded at First Aid to Severe Trauma Training in October,\
    \ 2022). In collaboration with FEMA, this effort adapted the Stop the Bleed curriculum,\
    \ adjusting the content to be age appropriate for middle and high school aged\
    \ students and provided additional general first aid introduction content. FAST\
    \ was fully funded by DHS S&T and is now offered through the American Red Cross\
    \ at no cost to anyone 18 years old or under. \n-\tCompleted a literate review\
    \ and evaluated the Blue Campaign products that were developed to raise awareness\
    \ about human trafficking in first responders through pre-post assessments with\
    \ identified participants. This study resulted in a manuscript titled “A Quasi-Experimental\
    \ Intervention Trial to Test the Efficacy of the Blue Campaign: A Human Trafficking\
    \ Awareness Campaign” which has since been published in the Journal of Human Trafficking."
  year: '2022'
- description: "2023 – Actual: Program accomplishments include: \n\n•\tPublished multiple\
    \ peer-reviewed articles on Rehabilitation and Reintegration which were made available\
    \ in the DHS Prevention Resource Finder and DHS Violence Prevention Guide, to\
    \ include:\no\tTrends in the Return and Prosecution of ISIS Foreign Terrorist\
    \ Fighters in the United States (August 2023)\no\tPractitioner Guide for the Provision\
    \ of Trauma-informed Care to Women and Children Exiting Violent Extremist Conflict\
    \ (June 2023)\no\tPerson-centered Outcome Brief (March 2023)\no\tRehabilitation\
    \ and Reintegration of Women and Children Returning from Violent Extremist Contexts:\
    \ A Rapid Review to Inform Program and Policy Development (Terrorism and Political\
    \ Violence, March 2023)\no\tReintegration Framework Best Practices Report (March\
    \ 2023)\no\tSupporting Women and Children Returning from Violent Extremist Contexts:\
    \ Proposing a 5R Framework to Inform Program and Policy Development (Terrorism\
    \ and Political Violence, March 2023)\n\n•\tPublished two manuscripts based on\
    \ evaluation of the DHS Blue Campaign\no\tReframing Human Trafficking Awareness\
    \ Campaigns in the United States: Goals, Audience, and Content (Frontiers in Public\
    \ Health, August 2023)\no\tA Quasi-Experimental Intervention Trial to Test the\
    \ Efficacy of a Human Trafficking Awareness Campaign: The Blue Campaign (Journal\
    \ of Human Trafficking, June 2023)\n\n•\tWildland Firefighter Respirator study\
    \ led to enhancements to design to include modifying the battery capacity.\no\t\
    Increasing single-use item from 4 hours to 8 hours"
  year: '2023'
- description: "•\t10+ knowledge products to be made publicly available for use by\
    \ SLTT partners and prevention practitioners, \n•\tUtilization of data and capabilities\
    \ to inform policy and practice for enhancing terrorism and targeted violence\
    \ prevention programming at the local level, and \n•\tReliable and valid data\
    \ for DHS incorporated into policy, practice, and operations in order to produce\
    \ assessments that are valid, reliable, and repeatable."
  year: '2024'
- description: "•\t10+ knowledge products to be made publicly available for use by\
    \ SLTT partners and prevention practitioners, \n•\tUtilization of data and capabilities\
    \ to inform policy and practice for enhancing terrorism and targeted violence\
    \ prevention programming at the local level, and \n•\tReliable and valid data\
    \ for DHS incorporated into policy, practice, and operations in order to produce\
    \ assessments that are valid, reliable, and repeatable."
  year: '2025'
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/a39973c243d34d338c081ca415e70a47/view
sub-agency: Science and Technology
title: 'Homeland Security, Research, Testing, Evaluation, and Demonstration of Technologies '
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=1d327291f81458cbccbf76d0368466b5
---
